FATF Report
Targeted Report on Regulatory Challenges
from Decentralised Finance (DeFi)
July 2026

The Financia l Action Task Force (FATF) is an independent inter-governmental body that develops and promotes
policies to protect the global financial system against money laundering, terrorist financing and the financing of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The FATF Recommendations are recognised as the global anti-money
laundering (AML) and counter-terrorist financing (CFT) standard.
www.fatf-gafi.org
For more information about the FATF, please visit
This document and/or any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any
territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.
Citing reference:
Targeted Report on Regulatory Challenges from Decentralised Finance, Paris, France
https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/fatf-gafi/en/publications/Virtualassets/targeted-report-decentralised-
FfiAnaTnFc (e2-2002266).,h tml ,
© 2026 FATF/OECD. All rights reserved.
No reproduction or translation of this publication may be made without prior written permission.
Applications for such permission, for all or part of this publication, should be made to
the FATF Secretariat, 2 rue André Pascal 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France or e-mail: contact@fatf-gafi.org
Photo credits cover photo ©Shutterstock

| 1
Table of Contents
Executive summary ............................................................................................................................................. 2
1. Understanding the landscape................................................................................................................ 3
..................................................................................................................................... 3
.......................................................................................................................... 7
1.1. Introduction
2. 1C.h2a. racteriSsctoicpse a onf dth veu rlenpeorratbilities of DeFi arrangements ..................................................................... 7
............................................................................................ 7
.......................................... 9
2.1. Characteristics of DeFi arrangements
3. 2S.t2a.tus of iVmuplnleemraebniltitaiteiso ann odf btharer FieArsT tFo S etfafencdtaivred As.M...L../..C...F..T../..C..P..F... s..u..p...e.r..v..i.s..i.o..n.......................................... 10
............................................................................................................ 10
....................... 13
3.1 The applicable framework
4. 3F.i2n. ancial cJruirmised ircitsioknss a’ nimdp tlyepmoelongtaietiso na sosfo Rceiacotemdm weinthda DtieoFni 1a5r rtaon DgeeFmi Aenrrtasn ..g..e..m...e..n...t.s......................... 15
.............................................................................................. 15
5. 4G.o1o. d PracTtihcreesa ti na cItmorpsl,e rmiskesn tainndg tRy.p1o5lo tgoi eDseFi arrangements ............................................................... 18
......................................................................... 18
................................................................................. 19
5.1. Effective risk assessment of DeFi arrangements ...................................................... 21
5.2. Defining controllers of DeFi arrangements .......................................................................... 24
5.3. Considerations to determine control in D..e..F..i.. a..r..r..a..n..g..e..m...e..n..t.s........................................................ 26
5.4. Assessment of control over DeFi arrangements .................... 27
5.5. Truly decentralised De ..F..i. .a..r.r..a..n..g..e..m...e..n...t.s........................................................................................ 30
5.6. Licensing and/or registration requirements for Centralised DeFi arrangements ...... 32
5.7. Supervisory practices
6. 5E.n8f.orcemeInntte arancdti oonth beert waceteionn Dse tFoi amrritainggaetem reinstkss a ansds orecgiautlaetde dw fiitnha DnceiFail ianrsrtaitnugtieomnse nantsd . .V..A...S..P..s........ 36
............................................... 36
........................................................................ 37
6.1. Use of blockchain analytics tools in D .e..F..i.-.r..e..l.a..t.e..d.. .i.n..v..e..s..t.i..g.a..t..i.o..n..s................................................. 37
6.2. Co-ordination with other competent authorities
7. 6In.3t.ernatioFnraele czoin-go panedra rteioconv .e..r..y.. .o..f. .i.l.l.i.c..i.t.. .f.u..n..d..s............................................................................................. 39
................................................................................................ 39
.......................................................................................................... 40
7.1. Cross-border information sh ..a.r..i.n..g.................................................................................................. 41
7.2. Cross-border investigations
Co7n.c3l.usion ..P..u...b..l.i.c..-.p..r..i.v..a..t.e.. .c..o..-.o..p...e..r.a..t.i..o..n............................................................................................................ 42
.............................................. 43
1.1. For jurisdictions ......................................................................................................................................... 43
R1.e2c. oFmorm theen dparitvioantes steoc mtoirt i.g..a..t.e.. .t.h...e. .r..i.s..k.. .s.t..e..m...m...i.n...g.. f..r.o..m.... .D..e..F..i. .a..r..r..a.n...g..e..m...e..n..t.s................................................ 45
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

2 |
Executive Summary
1. DeFi has expanded rapidly since the publication of the FATF Updated Guidance
for a Risk-Based Approach to Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers
in 2021. While still a relatively small share of the broader virtual asset market, its
growth, combined with increasing participation by institutional investors, VASPs,
and other regulated entities, has heightened its relevance within the global
financial system and its potential exposure to money laundering (ML), terrorist
financing (TF) and proliferation financing (PF) risks.
2. The DeFi ecosystem offers distinct advantages for the development of the global
financial sector. However, DeFi’s unique features, such as pseudonymity,
permissionless access, smart contract automation, composability and cross-
border reach, also create structural vulnerabilities that can facilitate rapid,
complex and opaque financial transactions. The report finds that these
characteristics are increasingly exploited by a range of illicit actors, including
fraudsters, ransomware operators, professional money laundering networks and
proliferation financing actors. Illicit activity often involves sophisticated
techniques such as chain-hopping, cross-chain bridges, decentralised exchanges,
mixers and governance manipulation, enabling the layering and co-mingling of
illicit funds within legitimate financial flows. These risks are amplified in
environments where AML/CFT controls are absent or insufficiently implemented.
3. The FATF Standards are technology neutral and apply whenever a natural or legal
person provides financial services. The 2021 FATF Guidance clarifies that DeFi
arrangements fall within the scope of Recommendation 15 where a natural or
legal person exercises control or sufficient influence over the arrangement.
4. In practice, however, jurisdictions in the FATF Global Network still struggle to
identify and regulate DeFi arrangements operating in their territory, due to their
cross-border nature, unclear jurisdictional anchors, limited supervisory technical
expertise, and challenges in distinguishing between DeFi arrangements’
inherently decentralised technology and potentially centralised governance.
5. A key challenge lies in identifying “control or sufficient influence” within DeFi
arrangements. Although many arrangements present themselves as decentralised
in terms of governance, this report finds that centralised elements frequently
persist in practice, including through governance token concentration,
administrative privileges, control over upgrades, significant economic benefits,
and influence over development and infrastructure. The report identifies a non-
exhaustive set of on-chain and off-chain indicators that can support jurisdictions
in determining whether such control exists.
6. Based on governance and control structures, the report distinguishes three broad
categories of DeFi arrangements: (i) those with identifiable controllers
(“centralised”); (ii) those that are centralised in practice but where controllers
cannot be readily identified; and (iii) those that are truly decentralised. The FATF
Standards apply to the first two categories. While truly decentralised
arrangements fall outside the scope of the Standards, as the latter cannot be
readily applied to them, such arrangements still present significant risks that
require alternative, risk-based mitigation measures.
7. The report highlights that effective implementation of the FATF Standards in the
context of DeFi requires a functional and risk-based approach. A number of
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 3
recommendations are made to help jurisdictions regulate and supervise DeFi
arrangements, including to determine the existence of control. Recommendations
are also made to DeFi arrangements, as well as Financial Institutions/VASPs
interacting with them, to mitigate the risk of criminal abuse.
1. Understanding the landscape
1.1. Introduction
1. Decentralised Finance (DeFi) has experienced significant growth in recent years,
1
with total value locked (TVL) reaching USD 86.644 billion in 2026, an increase
2
of approximately 85% compared to 2023. Despite its relatively small share of
3
the estimated total virtual asset market capitalisation , DeFi represents a growing
vulnerability within the AML/CFT/CPF regime due to its distinct characteristics
4
and increasing misuse by illicit actors. Moreover, institutional investors, virtual
asset service providers (VASPs) and other regulated entities are increasingly
placing financial resources in DeFi arrangements, drawn by high returns and the
advantages offered by the blockchain technology used in DeFi applications, such
as cross-border payments, transaction transparency, and easy access to global
customers.
2. These trends significantly amplify the risk that DeFi may be misused to co-mingle
illicit funds with legitimate assets, thereby undermining the benefits of its
innovative approach to finance. In light of these rapid developments, this report
examines the financial crime risks associated with DeFi and clarifies in what
circumstances the FATF Standards apply to certain DeFi arrangements.
- DeFi
Throughout this report, the FATF adopts the following definitions:
DeFi arrangement
refers to the technology and services delivered through blockchain-
based smart contracts. A , in contrast, encompasses the
broader ecosystem, including the persons, governance structures, and
- person
operational components that enable these services to function.
The term “ ”, particularly in the context of controllers of a DeFi
arrangement, includes individuals, as well as partnerships, foundations,
and other forms of legal persons or arrangements.
3. The DeFi ecosystem offers distinct advantages for the development of the global
financial sector. Th e participation of new developers and other actors fosters
financial innovation and provides a valuable testing ground for innovative
1
Total Value Locked (TVL) is a key metric used in decentralised finance (DeFi) to measure the total amount of assets deposited
in a DeFi protocol. It reflects how much value users have committed to activities such as lending, staking, liquidity provision, or
other smart-contract-based services. However, TVL is not a comprehensive indicator of a protocol’s footprint or associated
risks; for example, decentralised exchanges (DEXs) typically hold relatively low levels of locked assets while generating
2significant trading volumes.
According to DeFiLlama, TVL stood at USD 86.644 billion as of 10 May 2026, compared with USD 46.86 billion on 10 May 2023.
h3ttps://defillama.com/
Estimates indicate that around 4-6% of the virtual asset market is associated with DeFi
h4ttps://www.coingecko.com/en/charts
https://academic.oup.com/cybersecurity/article/11/1/tyae029/7962044 ; https://www.chainalysis.com/reports/crypto-
crime-2026/ ; https://www.crowdfundinsider.com/2026/05/276717-defi-hacks-report-april-2026-becomes-most-hacked-
month-in-crypto-history-by-number-of-incidents/
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

4 |
blockchain-based technologies. Protecting the DeFi ecosystem from illicit abuse
will allow customers to better leverage the benefits of these innovative financial
services.
4. The FATF Standards are technologically neutral and apply equally to all providers
of financial services. For DeFi arrangements, the FATF Standards apply whenever
an identifiable person has control or sufficient influence over the arrangement.
However, in practice, the DeFi sector remains largely unregulated, with many
jurisdictions struggling to implement effective AML/CFT measures. This is, in
part, due to some DeFi arrangements presenting themselves as truly
decentralised when in fact they are controlled by identifiable persons. The key
distinction is between the underlying technology, such as blockchain and smart
contracts, that enables automated transactions without an intermediary and is
inherent to all DeFi arrangements, and the governance frameworks of these
arrangements, which may or may not be controlled or influenced by identifiable
persons.
5. In 2019, the FATF updated R.15 and extended the application of the FATF
Standards to Virtual Assets (VAs) and VASPs. A VASP is defined in the FATF
5
Glossary as: “Any natural or legal person who is not covered elsewhere under
the Recommendations and as a business conducts one or more of the following
activities or operations for or on behalf of another natural or legal person:
i. Exchange between virtual assets and fiat currencies;
ii. Exchange between one or more forms of virtual assets;
iii. Transfer of virtual assets;
iv. Safekeeping and/or administration of virtual assets or instruments
enabling control over virtual assets; and
v. Participation in and provision of financial services related to an
issuer’s offer and/or sale of a virtual asset.”
6
6. The FATF 2021 Guidance on VAs and VASPs (hereafter the “Guidance”)
recognises the complexity of regulating VA activities and specifies when an
individual or entity should be classified as a VASP, with a focus on the functions
performed rather than the underlying technology. The Guidance urges
jurisdictions to distinguish between the decentralised technical nature of the
7
underlying DeFi protocol and the centralised governance framework that
may emerge through the control or influence exercised over the arrangement
by certain persons, such as creators, software developers or investors. The
Guidance further recommends that jurisdictions monitor emerging risks and
actively engage with the DeFi community to understand and address potential
ML/TF/PF threats. Countries are expected to conduct risk assessments of
DeFi, as appropriate on the basis of risk and context, and take proportionate
measures in line with R.1. Competent authorities should also issue guidance to
financial institutions and VASPs on best practices when interacting with DeFi
5
6 The FATF Recommendations, as amended October 2025
7 UpDdeaFtie dp rGoutoidcoanlce for a Risk-Based Approach for Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers
A is the smart-contract code deployed on a blockchain that automatically executes specific financial functions,
such as trading, lending, or liquidity provision, without requiring a central intermediary.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 5
arrangements. Since the publication of the Guidance, the DeFi ecosystem has
evolved, with different actors, including regulated entities, interacting with
DeFi arrangements.
7. The FATF does not define the term “DeFi” in its Standards. This report
distinguishes three types of DeFi arrangements based on their governance and
Centralised:
contorol frameworks:
The DeFi arrangement has identifiable controllers or
persons exercising sufficient influence (e.g. administrators,
governance token holders, developers, funders). Arrangements that
present themselves as truly decentralised for marketing purposes may
nonetheless be centralised in practice. Such arrangements fall within
Centralised where controllers cannot be readily identified
o the scope of the FATF Standards, and should always be regulated.
:
Control or sufficient influence over the DeFi arrangement exists but
the person(s) exercising such control cannot be identified due to
pseudonymity or other factors. Such arrangements fall within the
scope of the FATF Standards and should be regulated. However,
supervisory authorities may encounter practical challenges in
enforcing regulatory measures. When regulations cannot be effectively
applied, such arrangements should be treated, for practical purposes,
as unregulated. In such cases, jurisdictions should apply the same
Truly decentralised
o mitigating measures used for truly decentralised arrangements.
: No person maintains control or exercises
sufficient influence over the DeFi arrangement. Such arrangements fall
outside the scope of the FATF Standards and are generally
8
unregulated.
8. Countries should apply the FATF Standards by interpreting the relevant
definitions broadly, while remaining mindful of the practical intent of the
functional approach. In practice, in the context of DeFi, the FATF Standards
i.
apply to:
Person(s) who maintain control or sufficient influence over a DeFi
arrangement, even when the arrangement seems or markets itself as
decentralised. The FATF Guidance clarifies that jurisdictions may
consider different factors to determine control or sufficient influence,
including whether someone profits from the DeFi arrangement or has
the ability to set or change parameters in the protocol. Additional
considerations relevant to assessing control and influence are set out
in Section 5.3 of this report. A DeFi application (i.e. the software
program) is not a VASP under the FATF standards, as the Standards do
•
not apply to underlying software or technology.
As an example of such person(s), any person facilitating access to
a DeFi arrangement (e.g., through front-end interfaces, platforms,
applications, etc.) and actively facilitating the provision of
8
A truly decentralised arrangement may choose to seek regulatory oversight on a voluntary basis in order to demonstrate
stronger AML/CFT integrity and facilitate business with obliged entities.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

6 |
9
financial services is included in the FATF definition of VASP. This
is particularly relevant when the underlying DeFi arrangement is
ii.
unregulated for AML/CFT purposes.
Any financial institution or VASP interacting with DeFi arrangements
should be required to undertake a risk assessment of the products
offered by the DeFi arrangement and take appropriate measures to
manage and mitigate identified risks, in line with R. 15, first paragraph,
-
on mitigating risks from new technologies.
If the DeFi arrangement is regulated, financial institutions and VASPs
should conduct CDD on the DeFi arrangement and a review of its
-
AML/CFT framework, in line with the requirements of R.10 and R.13.
If the DeFi arrangement is unregulated, financial institutions and VASPs
should ensure that their interactions with the arrangement do not
undermine the integrity of their own AML/CFT frameworks. This may
include assessing the extent to which the DeFi arrangement effectively
incorporates AML/CFT safeguards (e.g., embedded KYC/CDD solutions,
use of KYC/CDD third party providers) and implementing appropriate
risk-mitigating measures with respect to the arrangement’s underlying
users (e.g., CDD, use of real-time blockchain analytics monitoring tools).
9. The FATF allows jurisdictions discretion in determining the criteria used to
assess whether a DeFi arrangement has a controller or persons exercising
sufficient influence. However, many jurisdictions continue to face challenges
in identifying and appropriately regulating DeFi arrangements due to several
i.
factors:
The global reach of DeFi, combined with the absence of a clear
jurisdictional anchor and, in many cases, the lack of a defined legal
ii.
form, complicate regulation, supervisory oversight, and enforcement.
Marketing strategies and claims of “decentralisation” by certain DeFi
arrangements, which may create the impression of absence of an
iii.
obliged intermediary responsible for AML/CFT compliance.
Limited information and understanding of DeFi’s technical,
operational and governance structures, which reduces authorities’
ability to accurately identify where control or sufficient influence
iv.
exists.
Constraints on supervisory resources and technical expertise, which
may limit authorities’ capacity to identify, understand and monitor
emerging DeFi protocols and associated AML/CFT solutions or tools.
9 active facilitation
See Paragraph 59 of the FATF Guidance on VAs and VASPs: “Conducts” includes the provision and/or of a
service, which refers to active involvement in the provision of activities covered under limbs (i)-(v) of the VASP
definition.https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/dam/fatf-gafi/guidance/Updated-Guidance-VA-
VASP.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 7
1.2. Scope of the report
i.
10. The objective of this report is to:
Identify emerging money laundering (ML), terrorist financing (TF) and
proliferation financing (PF) risks and vulnerabilities within the DeFi
ii.
ecosystem.
Clarify how the FATF Standards apply to DeFi arrangements and
outline good practices and practical tools that jurisdictions may adopt
to identify, regulate, supervise and investigate DeFi arrangements that
iii.
fall within the scope of the FATF framework.
Present criteria that jurisdictions may use in a risk-based manner to
identify controllers or persons exercising sufficient influence over
iv.
DeFi arrangements.
Propose recommended actions for relevant stakeholders.
11. This report updates and complements the FATF’s previous analysis of DeFi, as
set out in the 2021 Guidance on VAs and VASPs, in light of the sector’s
substantial expansion and evolution since the publication of that guidance.
This targeted report should be read alongside the FATF’s broader guidance
and work on VAs available on the FATF website and in Annex A.
12. This report is informed by research carried out in preparation for the FATF’s
2026 7th Targeted Update on the Implementation of FATF Standards on
Virtual Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers. References in this report to
practices implemented in particular jurisdictions are provided by way of
example only and should not be considered FATF-approved or an
endorsement of the effectiveness of any jurisdiction’s system. As with all FATF
Targeted Reports, this guidance is non-binding. In addition, jurisdictions
should do further work to fully understand how to test DeFi arrangements for
2. Chacroanctrtoelr oisr tsiucfsf iacinednt v inufllnueenrcaeb iinli tthieeisr oofw Dne cFoin taerxrta. ngements
2.1. Characteristics of DeFi arrangements
13. DeFi generally refers to a range of financial services, such as trading,
exchanging, lending, borrowing, and asset management, delivered through
blockchain-based, self-executing smart contracts rather than traditional
financial intermediaries. Users can maintain their funds in hosted or, more
commonly, unhosted wallets and interact with DeFi protocols that
programmatically enable the execution of complex peer-to-peer and peer-to-
pool financial transactions. Users’ interaction with a DeFi arrangement may be
either direct, through a DeFi platform or underlying protocol, or indirect,
through an obliged entity (e.g., a VASP).
14. DeFi arrangements share characteristics with the broader virtual asset
ecosystem: they are blockchain or DLT-based, enable immediate cross-border
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

8 |
transfers, and record all transactions publicly, albeit usually on a
10
i.
pseudonymous basis. They also have some unique features:
Smart contract-based automation of financial services: DeFi protocols
rely on often publicly visible smart contracts to fully automate
financial services and functions, which can complicate the attribution
ii.
of control over the arrangement to a particular person.
Open-source and composable protocol architecture: DeFi protocols
are typically, though not always, developed as open-source software,
allowing anyone to inspect, reuse and replicate the underlying code.
This facilitates the rapid creation of similar DeFi protocols. While this
interconnected design offers efficiencies for legitimate users, it may
also be exploited by illicit actors to move funds at an unprecedented
speed across multiple DeFi layers and related entities, including
unregulated offshore VASPs and over-the-counter brokers. The speed
of blockchain transactions, together with pseudonymous access and
the ability to execute automated operations through smart contracts
in rapid succession, constitutes a significant risk factor and may reduce
iii.
the effectiveness of traditional supervisory and enforcement timelines.
Algorithmic market and risk mechanisms: Some DeFi arrangements
create market structures, such as automated market makers, liquidity
pools, and lending mechanisms that algorithmically adjust interest
rates and trigger automatic liquidations when collateral thresholds are
breached often without the involvement of regulated intermediaries.
These features enable complex layers of transactions that may be
difficult to monitor using traditional compliance tools and blockchain
iv.
analytics.
User-driven liquidity provision and fee-earning: DeFi arrangements
allow users to act as liquidity providers, earning fees proportionate to
their share of liquidity pools while remaining pseudonymous. This
feature can be exploited by illicit actors, who may deposit and co-mix
illicit proceeds within large pools of legitimate liquidity and earn fees
11
v.
on those funds.
Participation: Many DeFi arrangements allow anyone with a
blockchain wallet to access and use financial services without
undergoing customer due diligence. This frequently open, unrestricted
access creates significant ML/TF/PF risks, as illicit actors can enter the
ecosystem pseudonymously and take advantage of its complexity to
launder funds.
10
In this context, “pseudonymous” means that transactions are associated with unique digital identifiers rather than
real-world identities, allowing activity to be publicly observable without directly revealing the identity of the parties
involved. The identities of the parties to a transaction are therefore not known, unless the DeFi arrangement
implements Customer Due Diligence (CDD), or the transaction involves a regulated VASP that may hold such
information as part of its Compliance Programme. While most DeFi arrangements operate under a pseudonymous
model, some smart contracts may be private or confidentiality-preserving and obscure key details such as transaction
amounts, addresses, or contract logic, thereby preventing third parties from linking activity to specific users or even
t11racing transactions on-chain.
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/DeFi-Risk-Full-Review.pdf, pages 18-19
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 9
vi.
Reliance on oracles: DeFi arrangements may depend on oracles, which
provide external data (e.g., asset prices, interest rates) to smart
contracts. Oracles enable core functionalities of the DeFi ecosystem,
including pricing, collateral valuation and liquidation mechanisms.
However, weaknesses in oracle design, governance, or data feeds may
be exploited by illicit actors to manipulate inputs and distort market
conditions. Such manipulation may facilitate illicit activity, including
2.2. Vulnerabiliftriaeusd aunledn tb laiqruriideartsio tnos eafnfde cthtiev leau AnMdeLr/inCgF oTf /ilCliPciFt psruopceeerdvsi.s ion
15. DeFi arrangements share several inherent vulnerabilities with the broader
12
virtual asset ecosystem. Some of their defining characteristics, particularly
their borderless, open-source design and ability to enable complex financial
operations create inherent risks. In addition to these intrinsic features, the
DeFi ecosystem also displays structural vulnerabilities shaped by underlying
technology, policy choices, governance frameworks, and the current stage of
i. Lack of regulatory framework:
market development. These include:
Many jurisdictions in the FATF Global
Network still do not implement R.15 with regards to DeFi
arrangements that fall within the scope of the FATF Standards (see:
Section 3.2). This allows illicit actors to take advantage of the uneven
and often fragmented implementation of regulations at the global level
ii. Lack of compliance by qualifying DeFi Arrangements
(regulatory arbitrage) and weakens consumer protection.
: DeFi
arrangements that fall within the scope of the FATF Standards may fail
to register with relevant competent authorities or to implement
required AML/CFT measures, including targeted financial sanctions,
KYC and CDD obligations. Many also lack mechanisms to cooperate
with law enforcement authorities (LEAs) and supervisory authorities,
iii. Cyber vulnerabilities
thereby hindering investigative and supervisory efforts.
: DeFi arrangements are exposed to significant
cyber risks due to weaknesses in smart-contract security, uneven
maturity of cybersecurity practices and the open-source nature of
many protocols, which allows malicious actors to analyse code and
13
identify exploitable flaws. Arrangements that hold large volumes of
assets are particularly attractive targets for hackers, increasing the
14
potential impact of successful exploits. The emergence of new
12
13 https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/Virtualassets/targeted-report-stablecoins-unhosted-wallets.html
Some commentators argue that open-source software is more resilient and secure than closed-source software, on
the basis that broader review and contribution, often by technically sophisticated users with diverse perspectives,
increases the likelihood that vulnerabilities are identified and addressed. Risks associated with open-source software
may be further mitigated by DeFi arrangements through measures such as smart contract audits, bug bounty
programmes, and the engagement of white-hat hackers. Other commentators note that risks are evolving, and the
advent of Frontier AI can exacerbate cyber vulnerabilities in DeFi arrangements also through the analysis of open-
1s4ource software.
For more information on cyber vulnerabilities in DeFi arrangements please consult
https://www.fsb.org/uploads/P160223.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

10 |
technologies, including AI and quantum computing, may further
iv. Shift towards payments without centralised on/off ramps
increase these risks.
: As payment
systems evolve, users may no longer need to convert virtual assets into
fiat currency through regulated financial institutions or VASPs. They
may also have reduced incentives to convert virtual assets into
stablecoins or deposit tokens to facilitate payments. As a result, the
15
mitigating effect of regulatory access points for DeFi arrangements
v. Perimeter-based regulatory arbitrage
may weaken.
: While the FATF Standards
require jurisdictions to identify DeFi arrangements that fall within
their regulatory perimeter, jurisdictions maintain a level of flexibility
in determining how this is assessed in practice. Differences in national
approaches, while reflecting domestic policy choices based on risk and
context, may enable globally distributed DeFi arrangements to locate
activities in jurisdictions with less stringent or less clearly defined
regulatory frameworks, thereby increasing the potential for
3. Status of imrpelgeumlateonrtya atribointr oagf et.h e FATF Standards
3.1 The applicable framework
16. As a principle, the FATF Standards are technology neutral, and risk-based
AML/CFT measures should be applied to services and activities that fall within
their scope, irrespective of the technology used. Jurisdictions should be guided
by the principle that the FATF framework applies to natural or legal persons
who as a business conduct the financial services covered by the VASP
16
definition.
17. The DeFi ecosystem has evolved significantly since the publication of the FATF
Guidance in 2021. It has progressed from primarily technical platforms aimed
at broadening access to financial services to increasingly sophisticated
arrangements that offer a wide range of financial products, generate revenues,
and seek to scale their operations, including through the provision of services
to regulated financial institutions. Growing investment by institutional
investors in certain DeFi arrangements indicates that some of these
arrangements are emerging as more substantial providers of financial
services, similar in function to traditional financial institutions, albeit
operating through blockchain-based infrastructure.
18. Jurisdictions should establish appropriate regulatory frameworks to ensure
that persons who maintain control or sufficient influence over DeFi
arrangements implement risk-based AML/CFT/CPF measures in line with the
15Regulatory access points
refer to centralised intermediaries, such as regulated VASPs, that act as key control points
through which users move funds into or out of the DeFi ecosystem. Because these entities or individuals are subject
to AML/CFT requirements, they provide a critical opportunity for authorities to apply oversight, identify illicit actors,
1a6nd disrupt financial crime.
Paragraph 68, FATF VAs and VASPs guidance https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/dam/fatf-gafi/guidance/Updated-
Guidance-VA-VASP.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 11
FATF Standards by taking into account the indicators set out in Section 5.3. of
this report, though relevant factors may vary depending on the specific
17
characteristics of the arrangement.
19. The DeFi ecosystem is typically described as a multi-layered architecture,
where each layer builds on the one below it (also called the “DeFi stack”). The
different layers have different levels of automatisation and decentralisation,
and the FATF Standards may apply differently to each layer:
i. Settlement Layer: Foundational distributed-ledger infrastructure (e.g.,
Ethereum, Solana, Hedera, etc.) that records transactions and provides
security, consensus and final settlement for all transactions that occur in
othe higher application layer.
The FATF Standards generally do not apply to payment infrastructure,
unless persons operating in this layer also provide services that fall
within the FATF definition of VASP.
ii. Asset Layer: includes the native tokens of blockchains (e.g., ETH, SOL,
HBAR, etc.), which are integral to the operation and security of the
blockchain, and other digital assets that are built or programmed and
deployed to and run on a blockchain, including stablecoins. These assets
represent units of value that can be traded, or otherwise used in financial
otransactions, occurring on or through DeFi protocols.
The FATF Standards apply to persons who provide digital asset
18
services that fall within the FATF definition of VASP.
iii. Protocol Layer: includes smart contracts that encode financial logic, such
as automated market makers (AMMs), lending/borrowing markets and
liquidity pools. These protocols define how assets move, how prices are
formed and what rules users must follow, and represent the “back-end”
oof the DeFi ecosystem.
The FATF Standards do not apply to smart contracts themselves, as
they are automated and decentralised software. However, the FATF
Standards apply to persons who exercise control or sufficient influence
over the smart contracts.
iv. Application Layer: includes front-end interfaces, such as websites and
smartphone apps, dashboards, applications or wallets and other tools that
make the underlying protocol providing DeFi services accessible to non-
technical users. Most retail and institutional users of DeFi access services
through this layer, though it is not required. The application layer may be
managed separately from the protocol layer and have different
ocontrollers.
The FATF Standards apply to persons operating in the application
layer to the extent they provide or facilitate the provision of VASP
services.
17
18 Further guidance on determining control is included in section 5 of this report (Good practices)
https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/Virtualassets/targeted-report-stablecoins-unhosted-wallets.html
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

12 |
v. Aggregation Layer: includes off-chain and/or on-chain protocols that
enable numerous DeFi protocols to be combined in one convenient
location at the application layer. Aggregators are intended to provide end
users with an optimal path for lending assets, purchasing or selling assets,
19
ominting new assets, etc.
the FATF Standards apply to persons operating in the aggregation
layer to the extent that they provide or facilitate the provision of VASP
20
services.
Box 1. International Bodies’ view of DeFi arrangements
The FATF Standards are technology neutral, meaning that DeFi arrangements are
subject to AML/CFT/CPF measures where they conduct one or more activities
withrieng uthlaet socroyp pea orift tyhe FATF Recommendations. Other international bodies have
emphasised the principle of technology neutrality in the context of DeFi, calling
for and for DeFi arrangements to achieve investor prfoutneccttiioonn-
abnadse dm aanrakleyts isintegrity outcomes comparable to those in traditional financial
markets. In practice, this approach can be operationalised through a
that focuses on the activities performed by DeFi arrangements and
on how existing regulatory frameworks may be applied or adapted to the DeFi
cFoinnatenxcti. al Stability Board (FSB):
the FSB finds that DeFi replicates some
functions of the traditional financial system, which causes it to inherit and at times
amplify conventional vulnerabilities such as the automatic liquidation of
21
dInetreivrantaivtieo pnoasli tOiorngsa nemisabteidodne do fi nSteoc sumriatriet sc oCnotmramctsis.si o ns (IOSCO):
IOSCO finds
that, in line with “same activity, same risk, same regulation/regulatory outcome”,
regulators should analyse DeFi arrangements within their jurisdictions with a
view to applying their regulatory frameworks, where applicable. They should aim
to identify persons or entities exercising control or sufficient influence over
financial products and services offered by DeFi arrangements, requiring them to
disclose clear and comprehensive information to promote investor protection and
market integrity. IOSCO also notes the importance of regulatory co-operation to
22
address cross-border risks and potential regulatory arbitrage.
19
https://hedera.com/learning/defi-
s20tack/#:~:text=The%20DeFi%20ecosystem%20is%20built,the%20settlement%20and%20asset%20layers
Examples of aggregators that may fall outside the FATF definition of a VASP include those that merely provide
informational or comparison services, such as dashboards or price aggregators displaying publicly available market
data, without controlling or facilitating the transfer of virtual assets. Similarly, interfaces that solely enable users to
view, analyse, or compare DeFi protocols without executing transactions, routing orders, or otherwise participating
in the transfer, exchange, or custody of assets may not meet the VASP definition. The classification of such aggregators
should be assessed on a case-by-case basis, taking into account whether they perform, or facilitate the performance
o21f, activities covered by the VASP definition under the FATF Standards.
22 https://www.fsb.org/2023/02/the-financial-stability-risks-of-decentralised-finance/
FR14/23 Final Report with Policy Recommendations for Decentralized Finance (DeFi)
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 13
International Monetary Fund (IMF):
The IMF considers DeFi as an innovative
but risk-intensive development that remains within the regulatory perimeter and
may pose financial stability and financial integrity risks as it becomes more
interconnected with the traditional financial system. It emphasises that many
DeFi arrangements retain effective governance or control through developers,
concentrated governance tokens, protocol design, or Decentralised Autonomous
Organisations (DAOs), such that regulatory responsibilities and AML/CFT
expectations may still apply. Accordingly, the IMF advocates a technology-neutral,
activity-based regulatory approach focused on risks rather than legal form,
including identification of regulatory “anchors” where control or economic
benefit exists, and proportionate mitigation measures, including restrictions
23
3.2. Juriswdhiecrteio rnissk’s i cmanpnleomt been atdaetqiuoant eolyf Rmeacnoamgemd.en dation 15 to DeFi
arrangements
20. Since 2021, the FATF has collected data and monitored market developments
in the DeFi ecosystem through its Targeted Updates on the implementation of
24
the FATF Standards to VAs and VASPs. The 2026 Targeted Update Report
25
indicates that most responding jurisdictions have yet to implement R.15
with regards to DeFi arrangements that fall within the scope of the FATF
Standards. Only a minority (26 out of 142) have assessed the risks linked to
DeFi, while a large majority (132 out of 142) have not identified any qualifying
arrangements operating in their territory. Furthermore, only four
jurisdictions have implemented licensing and registration requirements, and
just two, in practice, have actually licensed or registered such arrangements.
21. These results indicate that countries continue to face significant challenges in
i.
applying R.15 to DeFi arrangements, including:
Conducting an appropriate risk assessment, considering the complex
ii.
governance structures of DeFi and its cross-border nature.
Identifying DeFi arrangements that fall under the jurisdiction’s
iii.
regulatory framework.
Identifying the persons, if any, that maintain control or sufficient
iv.
influence over the DeFi arrangement.
Applying regulatory or enforcement measures to DeFi arrangements
that fall within the scope but fail to comply with applicable
requirements.
22. Challenges in implementing R.15 stem in part from the imprecise use of the
term “DeFi arran gement”, which allows some arrangements to present
themselves as decentralised despite exhibiting centralised governance or
23
24 https://www.fsb.org/2023/09/imf-fsb-synthesis-paper-policies-for-crypto-assets/
2025-Targeted-Upate-VA-VASPs.pdf.coredownload.pdf ; https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/dam/fatf-
gafi/recommendations/2024-Targeted-Update-VA-VASP.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf ; https://www.fatf-
gafi.org/en/publications/Fatfrecommendations/targeted-update-virtual-assets-vasps-2023.html ;
h25ttps://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/Fatfrecommendations/Targeted-update-virtual-assets-vasps.html
These statistics are based on the results of the 2026 FATF Survey on the state of implementation of R.15. A total of
142 jurisdictions provided information.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

14 |
control. Where such control or sufficient influence exists, these arrangements
fall within the scope of the FATF Standards and should be subject to
appropriate regulation.
Box 2. Risk-based approach and materiality considerations
While this guidance aims at providing greater clarity on the application of R.15
in the context of the DeFi ecosystem, it recognises that countries’ exposure to
potential ML/TF/PF risks related to DeFi varies considerably. Jurisdictions in
the FATF Global Network should apply the FATF Standards in accordance with
their national risk profile and materiality, consistent with the risk-based
approach. Countries should identify their most significant ML/TF/PF risks and
prioritise their responses and mitigating measures accordingly.
The FATF Standards require all jurisdictions to assess ML/TF risks associated
with VAs and VASPs, including DeFi. Jurisdictions with more significant DeFi
activity should allocate more resources to understanding, supervising, and
developing approaches to mitigate the illicit finance risks associated with DeFi
arrangements, taking into account the characteristics of the sector. Conversely,
low capacity jurisdictions with more limited exposure to VAs, VASPs and DeFi
should dedicate fewer resources proportionate to the risks identified, focusing
for example on monitoring market developments and emerging typologies.
In terms of materiality, available data indicate that DeFi activity is highly
concentrated, with North America and Europe accounting for approximately
60% of global activity, whereas the Middle East and Africa together are
26 27
estimated to contribute to less than 10%. Similarly, despite the large
number of DeFi arrangements, many of which are small-scale, inactive, or
duplicative, activity within the sector is highly concentrated. The top 12
protocols account for over 60% of global TVL, and the top 20 protocols are
28
estimated to represent more than 70% of total DeFi liquidity. Regulatory and
supervisory efforts should therefore take these market asymmetries into
account and prioritise engagement with the largest and most systemically
relevant DeFi protocols and associated stakeholders.
26
https://coinlaw.io/decentralized-finance-market-statistics/ ; https://www.chainalysis.com/blog/middle-east-
n27orth-africa-crypto-adoption-2024/
Regional DeFi activity is typically estimated using a combination of proxy indicators, including TVL, transaction and
trading volumes, user participation, and capital flows, with geographic attribution inferred from data such as
e28xchange on-ramp activity, wallet clustering, platform usage patterns and investment origin.
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/DeFi-Risk-Full-Review.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 15
4. Financial crime risks and typologies associated with DeFi arrangements
4.1. Threat actors, risks and typologies
23. Illicit actors exploit both the inherent characteristics and vulnerabilities of
DeFi arrangements. These risks are further exacerbated where effective
regulation is absent or insufficiently implemented, particularly in
arrangements that fall within the scope of the FATF Standards but fail to
Scammers and Fraudsters
comply with applicable obligations.
24. Global virtual assets-related fraud has grown exponentially in recent years
and increasingly leverages DeFi arrangements to launder the proceeds of
29
crime. In addition, some scams exploit DeFi protocols directly or
impersonate DeFi platforms to deceive victims. While DeFi arrangements have
the potential to support innovative payment solutions, they may also provide
complex financial services to users with limited financial literacy, thereby
raising significant consumer protection concerns as their adoption becomes
30
more widespread.
Box 3. Case Studies - The SafeMoon Token Scheme and the Forsage Case
(US)
The SafeMoon Token Scheme
The SafeMoon Token (SFM) scheme, which operated between March 2021 and
June 2022, involved over two million investors and a market capitalisation
exceeding USD 9 billion. The investigation found that Person X, the original
SafeMoon (SFM) developer, created a fraudulent scheme based on false claims
about locked liquidity and the absence of insider trading. Despite representing
that liquidity pools were secured, Person X and two coconspirators secretly
retained control over the liquidity through LP tokens, enabling them to
withdraw large amounts of SFM for personal gain. Over several weeks in early
2021, they removed tens of trillions of SFM, ultimately profiting over USD 7
million to fund luxury purchases, real estate investments, and personal trading.
Person X was charged with securities fraud conspiracy, wire fraud conspiracy,
and money laundering conspiracy.
The Forsage Case
Person X and three co-founders created and controlled Forsage, a platform
marketed as a legitimate DeFi investment opportunity powered by smart
contracts. In reality, Forsage was a Ponzi and pyramid scheme operating across
Ethereum, Binance S mart Chain, and Tron. Investors were required to buy
29
30 hFtotrp fsu:/rt/hwerw awna.clyhsaiisn oafl ycsoinss.cuomme/r bplroogte/cctrioynp tioss-suceasm ins -D2e0F2i6 s/e e the BIS and IOSCO papers:
https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap156.pdf; https://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD744.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

16 |
“slots” that generated income through recruitment and profit-sharing, but once
payments were made, funds were irreversibly redistributed to earlier
participants. Person X and her co-conspirators controlled the top-tier wallets—
such as Forsage ID 1—which earned the most and were not required to invest
any funds. Although Forsage claimed that income was transparently and
entirely distributed to users, part of the smart-contract code (notably the xGold
contract) siphoned funds directly to wallets controlled by the founders. Most
investors ultimately lost money, while Person X’s wallet was the only one to
receive over USD 1 million. The conspirators now face fraud charges for
misleading investors and operating the scheme through wire communications
Source: INTERPOL, United States
Professional Money Laundering Networks (PMLN) and Transnational Organised Crime
25. A wide range of illicit actors, often linked to transnational criminal
organisations, increasingly rely on PMLN to launder funds through DeFi
arrangements. These networks employ sophisticated layering techniques
designed to obscure transaction trails and bypass centralised exchanges with
AML/CFT controls. This typically involves fragmenting funds and moving
them across multiple wallets before routing them through DeFi services, such
as decentralised exchanges, cross-chain bridges, mixers, and swaps, to create
complex, multi-layered obfuscation, often using rapid, automated transactions
and chain-hopping. Following prolonged layering, the funds are consolidated
and off ramped into fiat currency via centralised exchanges with weak controls
or unlicensed OTC brokers and ultimately transferred back to clients through
31
underground banking and informal value transfer systems.
Proliferation financing Networks
26. Sophisticated DPRK state-linked groups have increasingly conducted
cyber-enabled attacks on DeFi arrangements and employed complex,
multi-layered laundering techniques within the DeFi ecosystem to generate
revenue for proliferation financing activities. In April 2026, two major attacks
on DeFi platforms attributed to the DPRK accounted for approximately 76% of
32
i.
annual losses from virtual asset-related hacking incidents:
The USD 285 million exploit of Drift Protocol, a major decentralised
perpetual futures exchange on Solana, was widely attributed to DPRK-
33
linked actors and executed in about 12 minutes. The attackers used
social engineering to obtain pre-authorised multisignature
31
32 Addressing APAC’s Informal Crypto Market: P2P & OTC Trading - Regulation Asia
https://www.trmlabs.com/resources/blog/north-korea-stole-76-of-all-crypto-hack-value-in-2026-with-just-two-
a33ttacks?trk=public_post_comment-text
https://www.trmlabs.com/resources/blog/north-korean-hackers-attack-drift-protocol-in-285-million-heist;
https://www.chainalysis.com/blog/lessons-from-the-drift-hack/ ; https://www.elliptic.co/blog/drift-protocol-
exploited-for-286-million-in-suspected-dprk-linked-attack
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 17
transactions, exploited the removal of a key timelock safeguard, and
introduced a fabricated token that was accepted by oracles as valid
collateral. This enabled them to inflate the token’s value and rapidly
extract substantial real assets. The incident highlights critical
vulnerabilities in governance, oracle design, and operational security,
as well as the growing sophistication of attacks targeting DeFi
ii.
arrangements.
The KelpDAO exploit resulted in losses of approximately USD 292
million following the exploitation of a single-verifier design flaw in a
LayerZero bridge. The attacker manipulated cross-chain validation to
drain funds from the protocol. While approximately USD 75 million of
the stolen assets were frozen, the remaining proceeds were laundered
through THORChain, underscoring vulnerabilities in bridge
architecture and the challenges of tracing and recovering cross-chain
illicit flows.
27. According to blockchain analytics companies, DPRK-linked hackers have
employed a range of tactics to evade controls, including targeting DeFi
arrangements that implement no, or limited, AML/CFT measures, conducting
frequent, small value, structured and often automated transactions through
DeFi arrangements and intentionally comingling illicit funds with large pools
34
of unrelated or legitimate assets to further conceal their origin.
28. There is evidence that Iranian proliferation networks have used certain tools
in the DeFi and blockchain ecosystem like bridges, mixers, and cross-chain
transfer mechanisms to obscure the movement of funds, although the majority
of their activity continues to rely on abusing centralised exchanges and
35
stablecoin-based payment channels.
Ransomware Groups and Hackers
29. The sophistication of ransomware attacks and criminal hacks has grown in
recent years, including through the abuse of DeFi arrangements. Ransomware
actors primarily demand payment in virtual assets and increasingly use DeFi
arrangements, such as decentralised exchanges (DEX), swaps and cross-chain
tools, to convert proceeds into other virtual assets and conceal the origin of
funds immediately after an attack. They also rely heavily on mixers to further
obfuscate subsequent movements of illicit funds. Cybercriminals also exploit
vulnerabilities in smart contracts governing DeFi arrangem ents to steal virtual
assets, with the speed of chain-hopping and DeFi-based transactions often
enabling laundering before industry or LEAs can respond.
34
35 North Korea IT Workers: Inside the DPRK’s Crypto Laundering Network
targeted-report-on-stablecoins-and-unhosted-wallets.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

18 |
Box 4. Risk Typology – Governance attack
Fraudsters can take advantage of the structure of decentralised autonomous
organisations (DAOs) that govern many DeFi arrangements. A DAO allows
users who hold governance tokens for the arrangement to vote on critical
changes or updates to the protocol. Illicit actors can accumulate governance
tokens, sometimes using flash loans, to gain functional control over a legitimate
DeFi arrangement’s governance mechanism. Once in control, fraudsters can
change key smart-contract parameters, redirect funds, or execute malicious
proposals to steal assets held within the protocol.
5. Good practices in implementing R.15 to DeFi arrangements
30. This section outlines good practices that jurisdictions may adopt to mitigate
the risks identified in previous sections. It covers the detection and
identification of controllers of DeFi arrangements, licensing, registration, and
supervisory oversight.
31. Regulators and supervisors should distinguish between the decentralised
nature of the underlying DeFi technology, which offers opportunities for
financial innovation, and the governance of DeFi arrangements, which may in
practice be centralised and therefore subject to AML/CFT requirements.
Authorities should carefully assess whether a DeFi arrangement is truly
decentralised in its governance, or whether it merely purports to be
decentralised, while, in reality, control remains concentrated among certain
5.1. Effecpteirvseo nrsis. k assessment of DeFi arrangements
32. Most jurisdictions continue to face challenges in adequately identifying and
assessing ML/TF/PF risks associated with DeFi (see: section 3.2). Jurisdictions
should understand their overall exposure to DeFi activities and conduct a risk
assessment of the DeFi sector that is adequate to their national context. This
assessment may be integrated into existing national, sectoral, or industry-
specific risk assessments, including the VAs and VASPs risk assessment. The
risk assessment should identify the nature and materiality of DeFi-related
ML/TF/PF risks, including the extent of domestic exposure, cross-border
dimensions, and potential vulnerabilities arising from the operation,
governance, and use of DeFi arrangements. Jurisdictions can refer to the FATF
guidance on risk assessment for general principles that apply also in the
36
context of the DeFi risk assessment.
33. R.15 further requires DeFi arrangements that fall within the scope of the FATF
Standards to undertake ML/TF risk assessments at the institutional level and
prior to the launch or use of the software or platform. These DeFi
arrangements should also take appropriate measures to manage and mitigate
36
https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/dam/fatf-
gafi/publications/Money%20Laundering%20National%20Risk%20Assessment%20Guidance.pdf.coredownload.inl
ine.pdf ; https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/Methodsandtrends/quick-guide-on-assessing-ML-risks-of-VA-
and-VASPs.html
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 19
ML/TF/PF risks on an ongoing and forward-looking basis and implement
adequate internal controls and risk mitigating measures as part of an effective
37
compliance framework.
Box 5. Conducting a risk assessment of DeFi Arrangements
United States
The United States Illicit Finance Risk Assessment of Decentralized Finance
38
(DeFi) , published by the U.S. Department of the Treasury in April 2023,
applies a risk-based, function-focused methodology to assess how DeFi
activities may be misused for illicit finance. The assessment combines
qualitative analysis of known typologies with case studies, blockchain
forensics, and consultations with U.S. law-enforcement agencies, regulators,
and private-sector experts. Rather than treating DeFi as a single category, it
evaluates risks across different DeFi functions (such as decentralised
exchanges, lending protocols, bridges, and mixing-like mechanisms), identifies
relevant actors who may exercise control or provide services, and maps these
activities against stages of the money-laundering lifecycle. The report covers
key threat areas including ML, TF ransomware, sanctions evasion, fraud, and
theft, while also examining structural vulnerabilities such as pseudonymity,
automation, lack of intermediaries, and cross-border reach. Importantly, it
distinguishes between the question of whether certain DeFi arrangements may
qualify as regulated entities under existing U.S. AML/CFT frameworks and the
broader, practical challenges of supervision and enforcement, highlighting both
current mitigation measures and policy gaps.
Hong Kong, China
Hong Kong, China, conducts ongoing assessments of the risks associated with
decentralised finance (DeFi) through a combination of market monitoring,
operational intelligence, and case-based analysis. Given that many DeFi
protocols operate without formal incorporation or registration in any single
jurisdiction, the Hong Kong Police Force (HKPF) maintains continuous
monitoring of developments in the global DeFi ecosystem. This includes
analysing widely used DeFi protocols, understanding their governance
structures, operational models, and revenue mechanisms, and assessing
5.2. Defininpgo tceonntitarlo vlulelnresr aobf iDliteieFsi tahrart amnagye bme eenxptslo ited for illicit finance purposes.
34. A key challenge for jurisdictions is determining what constitutes “control or
sufficient influence” over a DeFi arrangement. The FATF Guidance clarifies
that control shou ld be understood as the ability to take key decisions within
37
38 https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/dam/fatf-gafi/guidance/RBA-VA-VASPs.pdf
https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/DeFi-Risk-Full-Review.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

20 |
the DeFi arrangement. The controller(s) of a DeFi arrangement may be any
person who, in practice, has the authority to determine or materially influence
key protocol operations or the delivery of services to users, and/or who
39
derives significant economic benefit from such activities. “Significant
economic benefit” does not include broadly distributed returns (e.g. price
appreciation or rewards) accruing to token holders who do not exercise
control or influence over the arrangement. Controllers may have the ability
direct, approve, or influence the execution of protocol-level actions
to:
i. ,
including but not limited to the distribution of economic rewards, fees,
modify, upgrade, pause, or terminate the protocol or any of its
or emissions to users or participants.
smart-contract components
ii.
, whether through upgrade keys,
administrative privileges, emergency functions, or governance
determine, allocate, or manage protocol assets or treasury resources
mechanisms.
iii. ,
including the authority to deploy, re-allocate, or dispose of assets on
iv. add, remove, whitelist, or otherwise determine the participants,
behalf of the arrangement.
validators, or other critical users interacting with the DeFi protocol or
its components that ultimately facilitate the provision of financial
services.
appoint, remove, or influence persons performing key governance,
operational, or administrative roles
v.
, including developers,
40
multisignature signers , oracle operators, or governance delegates.
35. Jurisdictions may encounter different challenges in the practical identification
of controllers, particularly where influence is exercised indirectly, informally,
or, through decentralised governance and technical arrangements. To identify
controllers, jurisdictions may draw on a range of complementary sources of
i. open source information:
information, including:
such as publicly available blockchain data,
protocol documentation, governance proposals and voting records,
published audits, websites, blogs, social media activity, forums, and
other online communications that may reveal patterns of influence,
ii. third party information
decision-making authority, or economic benefit.
: including blockchain analytics, forensic
analysis, audit reports, transaction-flow mapping, disclosures by
service providers (such as front-end operators, custodians, or oracle
providers), information obtained through supervisory engagements,
39
In considering how to approach the question of control of DeFi arrangements, jurisdictions may also refer to IOSCO’s
Policy Recommendations for DeFi and recommendations on the need to identify ‘responsible persons’:
h40ttps://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/ioscopd754.pdf
Multisignature signers are the individuals or entities that collectively control a blockchain account, smart contract
or administrative function through a multisignature wallet. Their approvals (signatures) are required to authorise a
transaction or decision within a DeFi arrangement.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 21
and reports from academic, industry, or research organisations,
iii. intelligence provided by the FIU or LEAs
conferences and hackatons.
: including suspicious
transaction reports (STRs), investigative findings, seized digital
evidence, or communications (for example, instant-messaging chats,
emails, or co-ordination channels) that may demonstrate de facto
control, co-ordination, or decision-making authority exercised by
5.3. Consideratisopnecsi ftioc pdeertseornms oinr egr coounpstr woilt hinin D ae DFeiF ai rarrraannggeemmeenntt. s
36. The FATF does not prescribe a fixed set of criteria for identifying persons that
may exercise control or sufficient influence over a DeFi arrangement but this
report offers indicators (see paragraph below) that supervisory authorities
can use (in addition to others) to identify controllers of DeFi arrangements
established or operating in their territory, which should be applied flexibly
based on distinct operational and governance structures.
37. DeFi arrangements can exhibit varying degrees of centralisation in their
governance structures. Research suggests that more sophisticated and mature
DeFi arrangements in some instances retain identifiable controllers who
benefit from the underlying business activity and continue to exercise
decision-making authority over time, including in cases where the
arrangement transitions toward a Decentralised Autonomous Organisation
41
(DAO) model. The possible indicators provided below are indicative and
On-chain indicators of control:
non-exhaustive.
Upgradeability and back-door privileges
i. : The existence of upgradable
contracts, proxy patterns or kill-switch functions, particularly where such
powers are retained by a specific person or group, may indicate centralised
control. While transparently disclosed emergency functions maintained for
safety and security purposes (e.g., protecting assets in response to a cyber-
attack) may or may not, in themselves, indicate control, undisclosed or
unilateral access rights held by specific persons, which could present
Parameter setting:
material risks if misused (e.g., back-door access), often indicate control.
ii. Rights held by a person or group to unilaterally set or
modify key protocol parameters, including risk limits, fees, rewards,
collateral factors, or similar economic or operational settings are material
Oracle control:
indicators of control.
iii. the ability to select, configure or change price and other oracle
feeds, including switching to manual pricing or overriding oracle inputs,
Control over protocol-critical smart-contract infrastructure:
may indicate control.
iv. Exclusive or
dominant control over deployment keys, contract registries, or core
contract dependencies (e.g., automated keepers, executor networks,
41
https://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt2112b.htm;
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecb.wp3208~051a880042.en.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

22 |
settlement contracts) may indicate direct operational influence over
Fee flows and profits:
protocol integrity and continuity.
v. Control may be inferred where specific addresses
receive protocol level economic flows such as fees, maximal extractable
value (MEV) rebates, liquidation penalties, or token emissions (i.e., newly
issued tokens). Such flows can indicate continued influence or control by
Administration / gatekeepers:
the recipients.
vi. Where liquidity pools or protocol functions
are permissioned, meaning access is restricted to approved or whitelisted
participants, the persons who administer these permissions and determine
Governance concentration and voting power:
access rights may be identified as controllers.
vii. Concentrated governance
token holdings, influential delegated voting blocs, or low participation rates
that enable a small number of actors to determine governance outcomes
may indicate de facto control over strategic decisions, upgrades, and
treasury allocations.
Off-chain indicators of control:
Custody and operations:
viii. Persons designated as signatories for governance
or administrative decisions, those controlling upgrade keys, or those co-
ordinating or obtaining custodial services for assets on behalf of the
arrangement may be reasonably identified as controllers, given their ability
42
Front-end operation and distribution:
to influence critical operational or security-related functions.
ix. Control over public web front-ends
(including mobile apps) and associated content or tools (such as wallets)
may indicate centralised influence, as those who operate, maintain or
distribute these interfaces can shape how users access and interact with
Corporate entities:
the DeFi arrangement.
x. Companies, foundations, labs, operating companies, or
other legal persons that employ core contributors, hold IP rights, manage
treasuries or pay service providers may be exercising centralised control.
The extent of control depends on their actual independence from the
protocol and the degree to which they influence governance, development
Control over development, roadmap or off-chain infrastructure:
or operations.
xi. persons
who determine development priorities, control releases, or manage
essential off-chain infrastructure (e.g., indexers, data services, automation
systems) may exercise substantial influence over the DeFi arrangement’s
direction and functioning. This indicator may be separate from individual
42
Examples of such roles include signatories to treasury or reserve wallets holding protocol funds; administrators of
multisignature wallets used to execute governance decisions; holders of upgrade keys enabling modification of smart
contracts; or entities coordinating custodial arrangements for user or protocol assets. These functions confer practical
control over key aspects of the arrangement, including the movement of funds, implementation of protocol changes,
and mitigation of security incidents.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 23
developers who contribute to DeFi arrangements’ infrastructure without
Branding, communications and user direction:
demonstrating real control.
xii. Control over official
branding, public messaging, documentation, risk disclosures or educational
materials may indicate influence.
38. Controllers of DeFi arrangements may include persons with different roles and
responsibilities within the arrangement. The existence of multiple controllers
operating different components of a DeFi arrangement does not in itself
remove or dilute AML/CFT obligations. In practice, most DeFi arrangements
provide financial services akin to the FATF definition of financial institution
43
and VASP, and any person that maintains control or exercises sufficient
influence over the arrangement should be considered as providing or actively
facilitating financial services.
39. Controllers may include developers, governance token holders, core
maintainers, front-end operators, investors, oracle (and other data) providers,
foundation or corporate entities. This list is non-exhaustive, and controllers
can potentially overlap and fall into multiple categories depending on the
specific characteristics of the DeFi arrangement. Jurisdictions should adopt a
functional approach to the identification of controllers in the DeFi context,
assessing who effectively controls or influences different aspects of the
arrangement. For example, in certain jurisdictions, entities operating websites
or interfaces that facilitate user interaction with DeFi protocols may fall within
the regulatory perimeter where they provide or “arrange” VA services, even in
the absence of direct control over the underlying smart contracts. Other
jurisdictions may take a different approach.
43
Certain DeFi arrangements do not provide financial services and therefore fall outside the scope of the FATF
Standards. These typically include protocols or platforms that support infrastructure, governance, or data functions
rather than facilitating the transfer, exchange, or custody of assets. For example, decentralised governance platforms
that enable token holders to vote on protocol changes, blockchain oracles that supply external data to smart contracts,
and developer tools or protocol interfaces that allow users to interact with blockchain networks do not, in themselves,
constitute financial services.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

24 |
Box 6. Japan’s efforts to develop an appropriate and proportionate
regulatory framework to control DeFi arrangements
The JFSA held discussions on regulatory approaches to crypto-asset systems
through a Working Group (WG) on Crypto-asset Systems of the Financial
System Council, with the participation of private-sector experts. In the course
of these discussions, the JFSA referred to DeFi. The WG report published in
December 2025 noted that entities providing user interfaces (UIs), such as
applications that connect users to decentralised exchanges (DEXs), to
residents in Japan may need to be subject to regulation proportionate to risks.
Such regulation could include obligations to provide clear explanations of the
risks associated with the connected services, as well as AML/CFT
requirements, including customer due diligence obligations under Japan’s
AML/CFT Act.
Furthermore, the report indicates that while the development and
deployment of DEX protocols may fall outside the scope of the current legal
framework, DEXs have deficiencies or vulnerabilities in their protocols and
also carry a risk of being used for money laundering. It notes that
proportionate, technology-specific risk-mitigation measures—distinct from
those applicable to existing exchange service providers—should continue to
be explored, with due regard to international regulatory discussions. Building
on the directions set out in the report, the JFSA has been further deepening its
considerations while strengthening engagement with DeFi-related
stakeholders, holding ad-hoc roundtables with private sector firms and other
relevant participants.
Source: Japan
5.4. Assessment of control over DeFi arrangements
40. Although many DeFi arrangements present themselves as decentralised, a
number of them may have controllers who maintain decision-making
44
authority over key aspects of their operations. Supervisory authorities
should therefore remain vigilant and focus on the functions performed by DeFi
arrangements and the underlying business rationale, rather than how they are
labelled or marketed. Where a DeFi arrangement effectively provides business
services similar to those of financial institutions or VASPs, controllers may
exercise operational management and derive economic benefit from its
activities. In such cases, the arrangement should fall within the scope of the
jurisdiction’s regulatory and supervisory framework.
41. Supervisors should particularly be mindful of the following scenarios in which
control could be retained within purportedly decentralised DeFi
arrangements:
44
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecb.wp3208~051a880042.en.pdf ; 2024-2nd-global-cryptoasset-
regulatory-landscape-study.pdf; Ecosystem Map | DeFi Navigator
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 25
i. Governance transferred from a legal entity to a DAO
: Where a project
migrates governance from a company or foundation to a DAO, the
transfer may be nominal rather than substantive. Authorities should
look for indicators of continued control, including the founding
members retaining governance tokens or special voting privileges,
submitting most governance proposals, maintaining de facto
operational control over the DAO, or benefitting from most fee flows
ii. Governance tokens distribution
and profits.
: concentration of governance tokens in
a small number of wallets (e.g., a protocol in which fewer than 1% of
wallets hold a controlling majority of voting power) may indicate
control over the DeFi arrangement. Supervisors should carefully
assess the practical privileges and influence associated with the
governance tokens, such as voting weight, proposal rights, veto
powers, and upgrade authority, to determine whether token
concentration translates into meaningful decision-making control in
practice. Persons may also exercise control or sufficient influence over
a DeFi arrangement by holding governance tokens across multiple
seemingly unrelated wallets. When assessing governance structures,
supervisors should therefore consider potential wallet clustering and
iii. Delegation of voting rights and voting patterns
behavioural patterns that may indicate consolidated control.
: small or inactive
governance token holders may delegate their voting rights to other
participants, thereby bolstering other token holders’ influence over
the arrangement. While delegation is often presented as a mechanism
to increase participation and improve governance efficiency, it can
also significantly concentrate effective control, amplifying the
influence of large token holders and obscuring the extent of
consolidated influence. Delegation of voting rights may be complex
and opaque, and authorities should carefully assess specific
circumstances to determine whether it may confer effective control.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

26 |
Box 7. Exampl e of control in DeFi arrangements
45
Ooki DAO – United States
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) charged Ooki Decentralised
autonomous organisation (DAO) in an administrative order against Ooki DAO’s
1. Use of DAO structure to avoid oversight
predecessor LLC (bZeroX).
: bZeroX LLC transferred control of the
software to a DAO. The founders explicitly advertised the move to the bZeroX
community as a way to avoid complying with the Commodity Exchange Act
(CEA) and potential enforcement actions, but control was actually retained by a
2. Founders’ influence through governance tokens
few persons.
: Formally, voting rights and
admin keys were distributed among holders of a specific governance token.
Individuals with these tokens included the founders, who could propose and
vote on protocol changes and influence key financial operations. Ooki DAO
lacked formal centralised leadership, however, de facto the founders continued
to exercise control through governance tokens.
In June 2023, a federal judge ruled in favour of the CFTC and held that Ooki DAO is a
“person” under the CEA, with token holders effectively exercising collective managerial
authority even though no central executive team directed the operations. The Court
order required Ooki DAO to pay a civil monetary penalty of over USD 643,000. However,
the decision was a default judgment as Ooki DAO did not appear before the court and
therefore carries limited precedent under U.S. law.
5.5. Truly decentr alised DeFi arrangements
42. While some DeFi arrangements have centralised elements, other DeFi
arrangements may be highly decentralised, with no person exercising control
or sufficient influence over their operations. These DeFi arrangements do not
fall within the scope of the FATF Standards. Supervisors should assess the
46
control structure of a DeFi arrangement using a range of criteria before
determining whether the arrangement is truly decentralised. Authorities
should not rely solely on information provided by the DeFi arrangement itself
or on marketing terms used to describe its degree of decentralisation but
should conduct an independent analysis to understand different types of
control structures that may exist within the arrangement, (e.g., operational,
governance, etc.).
43. Regulatory and supervisory authorities will not be able to mitigate the risks
posed by truly decentralised DeFi arrangements through the direct imposition
of AML/CFT requirements. Instead they should consider broader, risk-based
45
https://www.taxnotes.com/research/federal/court-documents/court-opinions-and-orders/court-orders-
s46hutdown-blockchain-based-software-operator/7jhws
Please refer to the considerations set out in Section 5.3 of this report.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 27
and holistic mitigating measures, including issuing guidance to regulated
entities on the risks of interacting with such arrangements, and clarifying
whether, and under which conditions (e.g., the application of enhanced
AML/CFT controls), engagement with these arrangements may be
appropriate. Regulated entities that interact with the DeFi ecosystem may
i. Stablecoin issuers
include:
that retain the ability to freeze and burn stablecoins
ii. VASPs that provide on- and off-ramps47
used in truly decentralised DeFi protocols.
into the DeFi ecosystem, and
have KYC and CDD responsibilities, as well as the obligation to submit
iii. front-end platforms48
STRs for suspicious transactions.
used to access the underlying DeFi arrangement
iv. Financial institutions
that may have identifiable controllers and AML/CFT obligations.
interacting with the DeFi arrangement.
44. In parallel, regulatory and supervisory authorities are also encouraged to
engage extensively with the private sector to consider innovative AML/CFT
solutions that could be applied also in the context of truly decentralised DeFi
arrangements, including leveraging cryptographic and digital identity
technologies, as well as blockchain analytics.
5.6. Licens ing and/or registration requirements for centralised DeFi
arrangements
Centralised DeFi arrangements
45. Jurisdictions should impose licensing or registration requirements on
49
i.
centralised DeFi arrangements to be compliant with R.15.
At a minimum, DeFi arrangements that are controlled by legal persons
should be required to be licensed or registered in the jurisdiction(s)
ii.
where they are created.
In cases where the controller or person exercising sufficient influence
over the DeFi arrangement is a natural person, such person should be
required to be licensed or registered in the jurisdiction where their
place of business or residence is located.
47
On- and off-ramps refer to services that enable movement between the traditional financial system and the virtual
assets ecosystem. An on-ramp allows users to convert fiat currency (e.g., EUR, USD) into virtual assets, or virtual assets
into another virtual asset, serving as an entry point into the virtual asset environment. Conversely, an off-ramp
enables users to convert virtual assets back into fiat currency, providing an exit route from the virtual assets
ecosystem and ensuring users can redeem virtual assets for spendable, real-world currency.
h48ttps://www.coinbase.com/en-fr/learn/crypto-basics/what-are-fiat-on-ramps-and-off-ramps
Authorities should be able to determine how to treat front-end providers at their own discretion, either as a
49
compenent of a DeFi arrangement or as an independent function.
Paragraph 3, Interpretative Note of Recommendation 15 FATF Recommendations
2012.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

28 |
iii.
Jurisdictions may also require persons controlling DeFi arrangements
that provide, facilitate or promote products and services to customers
50
within their jurisdiction to be licensed or registered.
Centralised DeFi arrangements where controllers cannot be readily identified
46. While supervisory authorities may be able to determine that a DeFi
arrangement has controllers, for example through the analysis of
governance-token voting rights, associated wallet behaviour and other factors,
the process of identifying those persons may still be difficult due to the
pseudonymous nature of the blockchain ecosystem. To mitigate these issues,
supervisory authorities should collaborate as closely as possible with other
entities that may hold additional information on the identity and role of
i.
controllers, including:
ii.
relevant domestic authorities, including FIU and LEAs.
Foreign counterparts by leveraging established international co-
51
iii.
operation mechanisms.
Private sector, including blockchain analytics companies, who may be
able to collect further identifiers leveraging technological tools.
47. Where possible, supervisory authorities should engage with DeFi
arrangements to request information on persons exercising control,
particularly where such controllers cannot be readily identified despite being
subject to licensing or registration obligations under R.15.
48. Supervisory authorities should adopt a risk-based approach to the
identification of controllers, prioritising their efforts based on materiality of,
and risks posed by, the DeFi arrangement within their jurisdiction.
52
Supervisors should explore all reasonable avenues to identify the persons
exercising control. If, after undertaking such efforts, supervisory authorities
are still unable to identify the controllers, they may apply similar
risk-mitigating measures as those recommended for truly decentralised DeFi
arrangements.
49. Supervisors should undertake ongoing efforts to identify controllers and
effectively implement regulatory measures for centralised DeFi arrangements
in line with the FATF Standards, particularly where these arrangements
present higher risks. Examples of such efforts can include but are not limited
i. continuous blockchain analytics
to:
Conducting , including transaction
tracing, wallet clustering, and network analysis to identify linkages
between addresses and potential controllers.
50
The FATF has analysed the risks and regulatory challenges linked to Offshore VASPs (including relevant DeFi
arrangements) in March 2026 https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/Virtualassets/Understanding-Mitigating-
R51isks-Offshore-VASPs.html
52 Please refer to the information included in sections 6.1. of this report.
Depending on the risk and context of the jurisdiction, “reasonable avenues” may include the actions set out in
paragraph 47, as well as co-operation with the entities identified in paragraph 44.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 29
ii. governance and operational control
Monitoring points, such as
voting activity, proposal initiation, multisignature signatories,
iii. regulated entities
treasury wallet management, and the use of upgrade or admin keys.
Leveraging as information gateways, including by
requiring VASPs and financial institutions to collect, analyse, and
iv. supervisory and financial intelligence tools
report information on interactions with DeFi arrangements.
Using , including STRs,
supervisory reporting, and data from fiat on/off-ramps to support
v. ongoing monitoring frameworks
attribution efforts.
Maintaining , ensuring that
identification efforts are continuous and adapted as new information,
vi. Documenting and periodically reassessing efforts
tools or risks emerge.
, including
maintaining records of investigative steps taken, outcomes, and
updated risk assessments over time.
Box 8. Imposing licensing and registration requirements to DeFi arrangements
1. Jurisdictions should ensure that perimeter-review processes are designed to be
able to identify DeFi arrangements operating within their territory, using, when
relevant, the same methods and tactics to detect non-resident (“offshore”)
53
VASPs. These may include: web-scraping and open-source information to
identify any advertising, promotional communication or other solicitations for
business; information from the general public, obliged entities (e.g., VASPs) and
industry circles; FIU or other information from reporting institutions, such as
STRs or investigative leads; law enforcement or intelligence reports, including
information from international co-operation (e.g., tips from international
counterparts).
2. Where a DeFi arrangement is identified, supervisory authorities should conduct
a holistic “control assessment” to determine whether the arrangement is
genuinely decentralised. This assessment may be informed by the indicators set
out in section 5.3 of this report, as well as any additional criteria determined by
the Supervisory Authority.
3. Where an arrangement is found to be centralised and to have persons exercising
control or sufficient influence over its operations, supervisors should allocate
appropriate resources to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the
arrangement’s control structure.
a. Where the controller(s) can be identified, the DeFi arrangement should be
brought within the supervisory perimeter as a VASP or a financial
institution consistent with the activities conducted and the jurisdiction’s
regulatory framework.
53
Section 3.1 of the oVASP report : https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/dam/fatf-gafi/reports/Understanding-
Mitigating-Risks-Offshore-VASPs.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

30 |
b. Where the controller(s) cannot be identified after all reasonable avenues
have been explored, supervisory authorities may consider alternative
mitigating measures similar to those applied for truly decentralised DeFi
arrangements. Supervisors should take ongoing efforts to identify
controllers and effectively implement regulatory measures for such DeFi
arrangements in line with the FATF Standards, particularly where these
arrangements present higher risks.
4. Where arrangements are truly decentralised, they do not fall within the scope
of the FATF Standards; however, jurisdictions should still adopt a risk-based
approach and consider what alternative measures can be implemented to
mitigate the illicit finance risks posed by these arrangements.
5.7. Supervisory practices
50. Jurisdictions should consider the following supervisory practices when
shaping their approach to the unique characteristics of the DeFi ecosystem and
mitigating associated illicit finance risks. Countries should avoid adopting a
tick-box approach, as DeFi arrangements often exhibit highly variable and
distinctive features. Supervisory measures should instead be proportionate,
risk-based, and tailored to the specific risks and contextual factors presented
by each DeFi arrangement. It is also critical that supervisors issue clear
guidance on existing requirements (including that DeFi arrangements should
be subject to licensing or registration when controllers exist) so that obliged
Establish clear standards for smart contract audits
entities fully understand jurisdictions’ expectations.
51. : Jurisdictions may consider
establishing robust and transparent standards for smart-contract audits to
ensure that reviews of DeFi arrangements are comprehensive, independent,
and aligned with recognised security best practices. Jurisdictions may also
consider making audits mandatory for certain categories of DeFi
arrangements, particularly those handling significant user funds, employing
complex cross-chain bridges, or relying on high-risk architectural components
Require, or at least encourage, embedded AML/CFT controls at protocol and/or
(e.g., multi signature administrative keys, proxy patterns).
interface layer:
52.
Jurisdictions may consider requiring or at least encouraging
DeFi arrangements to embed AML/CFT controls directly within their smart
contracts interface layer or as an external wrapper. These may include, for
example, automated freezing mechanisms for addresses associated with
sanctioned persons, on-chain risk-scoring logic, controls that delay or block
high-risk transactions pending verification, or requirements for verifiable
credentials (e.g., proof-of-KYC) before executing certain high-risk functions.
Such embedded controls can help mitigate illicit finance without
disproportionally hindering distinctive and innovative features of the DeFi
ecosystem.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 31
Box 9. France working group on smart contract certification
In January 2024, the Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR) and the
Autorité des Marchés Financiers (AMF) jointly established a working group under the
ACPR-AMF Fintech Forum to examine smart contract certification within the broader
context of potential future DeFi regulation. The group focused on defining possible
certification standards and audit methodologies. Its findings were published in
February 2025 in a report available on the ACPR and AMF websites.
The report explores how certification could reduce user risks, enhance trust and
possibly inform future regulatory frameworks. It provides high-level principles, views
from working group members, and explores regulatory options around the certification
of smart contracts, highlighting that trust and resilience in DeFi ecosystems require
certification based on clear, measurable standards, including on compliance.
The report mentions that measures to combat ML/TF/PF could be technically
embedded directly into specific smart contracts, thereby facilitating their use by
entities subject to AML/CFT regulation, including crypto-asset service providers and
other financial institutions. For example, smart contracts could incorporate regularly
updated lists of addresses with which interactions are prohibited. In addition, elements
of zero-knowledge proof (ZKP)–based customer verification could be integrated to
ensure that access to certain smart-contract functionalities is restricted to users who
have undergone enhanced identity or due-diligence checks. The study highlighted that
a smart contract certification could assess areas such as security and code quality,
governance and upgradeability, execution environment, transparency and access
control, lifecycle management and user protection.
Source: France
Issue best practices for transparent and responsible emergency controls
53. :
Jurisdictions may consider issuing a set of best practices related to the design
and use of emergency controls (e.g., pause functions, circuit-breakers) within
DeFi arrangements. These guidelines should clarify how such controls can be
implemented transparently, with appropriate governance safeguards and
accountability, to mitigate severe risks such as cyberattacks, protocol exploits,
or large-scale laundering, while preserving the arrangement’s decentralised
Enhance oversight of front-end providers and oracle operators
characteristics to the greatest extent possible.
54. : Jurisdictions
may consider enhancing oversight of key off-chain infrastructure providers,
particularly front-end interfaces and oracle operators, as these components
exert significant influence over user interactions and protocol behavior.
Supervisors may encourage or require such providers to adopt measures that
reduce illicit activity, such as automated screening, risk-scoring, geo-blocking
based on sanctions, or improved transparency around oracle data sourcing
Conduct blockchain monitoring of high risk DeFi arrangements
and manipulation-resistance.
55. : Jurisdictions
may consider deploying blockchain-analytics capabilities to monitor DeFi
arrangements operating in their territory. This may involve tracking
suspicious flows, identifying patterns consistent with illicit finance, and
conducting ongoing risk assessments based on transaction data. Jurisdictions
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

32 |
may also consider sharing relevant findings with regulated financial
institutions and VASPs that interact with these arrangements to support
Promote transparency in DeFi governance structures
stronger detection of illicit funds.
56. : Jurisdictions may
consider introducing measures to ensure that DeFi arrangements maintain
transparent and easily identifiable governance structures. This can help
reduce the risk of governance obfuscation, concentration of control, or covert
influence by illicit actors. Measures may include encouraging public disclosure
of governance processes, ensuring clarity around voting rights and delegation,
and promoting transparency regarding persons that influence upgrades,
Regulatory sandboxing
parameter changes, or protocol operations.
57. : Regulatory sandboxes are schemes established by
competent authorities that allow regulated and unregulated entities to test
innovative products or services under defined guardrails. Jurisdictions may
consider establishing regulatory sandboxes for DeFi arrangements to trial
supervisory approaches in a controlled, risk-managed environment.
Regulatory sandboxes can be resource-intensive for both the public and
54
private sector and may not be the most appropriate tool in all scenarios.
Box 10. Regulatory sandboxes for DeFi arrangements
Bermuda
DerivaDex Bermuda 1 Class T (Sandbox ) – small scale limited operation with
continuous oversight from Prudential, Cyber risk and AML on their risk and
governance and evolution of the Company. Operating volume – as the Company
has recently started operations, with license restricted to 1,000 active users.
The Company doesn’t hold client funds. The only DeFi arrangement currently
operating out of the jurisdiction sought licensing and the governance structure
is known to the Authority.
The single DeFi arrangement operating has implemented, through an
Outsourcing arrangement, KYC/CDD verification services, AML checks, Proof of
address verification, Crypto AML checks, Identity document authentication,
Face match verification, Ongoing AML monitoring.
Source: Bermuda
5.8. Interaction between DeFi arrangements and regulated financial
institutions and VASPs
58. Jurisdictions should ensure that financial crime risks associated with the DeFi
ecosystem are sufficiently understood by obliged entities, including financial
institutions and VASPs. The financial sector is increasingly interested in
interacting with DeFi arrangements, both within permissioned and
54
Building A Regulatory Sandbox | Digital Finance Inclusion; Regulatory sandbox toolkit | OECD; How Regulatory
Sandboxes Foster Innovation and Compliance in Crypto
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 33
permissionless environments, to take advantage of operational benefits,
including automated settlement, cross-border outreach, 24/7 availability, and
generally higher yields. As regulated financial institutions, VASPs and DeFi
arrangements become more interconnected, developments within the DeFi
ecosystem can have broader implications for AML/CFT compliance,
potentially heightening ML/TF/PF vulnerabilities across the broader virtual
assets and financial system.
59. Financial institutions and VASPs interacting with DeFi arrangements should
be required to undertake a risk assessment of the products and take
appropriate measures to manage and mitigate the risks posed by these
arrangements, in line with R.15 paragraph 1. When financial institutions and
VASPs offer services to DeFi arrangements, they should also comply with
Recommendations 10 (Customer Due Diligence when the DeFi arrangement is
seeking to become a client or is already a client) and Recommendation 13
(when the DeFi arrangement is seeking to establish a correspondent banking
relationship), and they should refrain from interacting with DeFi
arrangements if these specific obligations under the FATF standards cannot be
fulfilled. They also have a general obligation to maintain the integrity of their
AML/CFT frameworks and to ensure the effective application of preventive
measures within their ecosystems. Financial institutions and VASPs should
assess DeFi arrangements in a risk-based and proportionate manner and
i.
implement appropriate mitigating measures in different scenarios:
Centralised DeFi arrangements: Financial institutions and VASPs
should conduct CDD on the DeFi arrangement, in line with the FATF
Standards on correspondent banking, including determining whether
the arrangement is licensed or registered and subject to adequate
supervision. Financial institutions and VASPs should perform
adequate due diligence or ensure that the arrangement has
implemented AML/CFT controls, in line with Recommendations 10
55
ii.
and 13.
Centralised DeFi arrangements where controllers cannot be readily
identified and truly decentralised DeFi arrangements: Financial
institutions and VASPs should apply appropriate AML/CFT measures
to the underlying customers of the DeFi arrangement, including
identity verification, and, where appropriate, ongoing monitoring of
the protocol’s integrity and security. Financial institutions and VASPs
remain responsible for ensuring that their interactions with such
arrangements are compliant with AML/CFT requirements.
Supervisors should provide further guidance to obliged entities, taking
into account jurisdictional risks as well as sector- and entity-specific
considerations.
60. Financial institutions and VASPs’ interactions with DeFi arrangements should
be matched with robust risk-mitigation measures. DeFi arrangements that
allow unrestricted user access without any AML/CFT controls may be
55
Some DeFi arrangements have established permissioned environments to interact with regulated financial
institutions while meeting regulatory expectations. Financial institutions should assess the sophistication of
AML/CFT controls implemented by these DeFi arrangements and ensure that these are compatible with their own
AML/CFT programs.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

34 |
considered higher risk, as they can facilitate direct interaction with potentially
illicit actors. Financial institutions and VASPs should carefully assess whether
they can implement adequate AML/CFT mitigating measures within their own
compliance framework to interact with such arrangements without breaching
their compliance obligations.
61. While understanding a DeFi arrangement’s governance structure, audits, and
cybersecurity controls is good practice, obliged entities should prioritise
assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of the AML/CFT controls
implemented by the arrangement and establish robust frameworks to
effectively identify and verify the identity of its underlying users. They should
also apply additional mitigating measures (e.g., real-time monitoring through
blockchain analytics tools) as appropriate.
62. Regulatory and supervisory authorities may consider adopting a tailored and
more flexible approach where truly decentralised DeFi arrangements
incorporate effective AML/CFT risk-mitigation measures at the protocol level.
Such measures may include reliance on third-party KYC/CDD providers,
embedded KYC/CDD solutions, and the use of allow-lists or block-lists at the
smart contract or front-end level. In such cases, the residual risk associated
with the DeFi arrangement may be lower, and the AML/CFT controls applied
by financial institutions and VASPs to the underlying customers of the DeFi
arrangement may be calibrated, provided that risks are mitigated effectively
and on an ongoing basis.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 35
Box 11. Case studies: Financial institutions and VASPs interaction with DeFi
arrangements
Domestic co-operation between financial regulator and law enforcement to support
robust supervision
The UK adopts a multi-agency co-operation approach at the domestic level to
address emerging risks associated with DeFi, particularly where these activities
intersect with traditional financial services and the broader virtual asset
ecosystem. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), as the regulator of VASPs,
works closely with law enforcement agencies such as the National Economic
Crime Centre through regular meetings and information-sharing forums covering
ML/TF/PF risks.
These mechanisms enable law enforcement to inform the FCA of new business
models involving regulated financial institutions, VASPs, and DeFi. In response,
the FCA has undertaken targeted supervisory activities to assess the application
and effectiveness of financial crime controls on new products that were not
covered at the time of authorisation.
These supervisory efforts include reviews of on- and off-ramping arrangements,
product risk assessments (including links between fiat and virtual assets), wallet
management practices, customer onboarding processes, CDD/EDD measures,
and compliance with travel rule and sanctions requirements. This work has
allowed the FCA to identify gaps and require improvements where necessary.
Overall, the case demonstrates how effective multi-agency co-operation can
support early intervention outside the regular supervisory cycle and foster a
shared understanding among competent authorities of ML/TF risks associated
with emerging DeFi-related products.
Source: United Kingdom
Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) Supervisory Practices
MAS engages with Digital Payment Token Service Providers (DPTSPs) to evaluate
their DeFi exposure on a bilateral basis, as part of the supervisory and licensing
process. At the minimum:
1. If a DPTSP provides services to customers engaged in DeFi-related activities,
the customer’s source of wealth and any other material nexus to these activities
should be considered as part of the DPTSP’s customer risk assessment. Where
appropriate, the VASP should apply enhanced due diligence (EDD), including
strengthened ongoing monitoring. DPTSPs should fully consider the nature and
risk profile of the customer’s DeFi-related activities and ensure that their risk
assessment is comprehensive and proportionate.
2. If the DPTSP partners with a DeFi platform to provide customer services, the
DPTSP should conduct a risk assessment on the ML/TF risks associated with the
provision of services through the DeFi platform, as well as due diligence on the
DeFi platform to assess (i) the robustness of the DeFi platform’s AML/CFT/CPF
risk control framework; and (ii) the DeFi platform’s alignment with the DPTSPs
own AML/CFT/CPF framework and regulatory requirements.
Source: Singapore
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

36 |
6. Enforcement and other actions to mitigate risks associated with DeFi
arrangements
63. The FATF has published guidance on how authorities can investigate and
confiscate virtual assets, including stablecoins, which is also relevant for DeFi
56
arrangements. In the specific case of DeFi, authorities may face additional
57
challenges arising from their unique characteristics. DeFi-related
investigations often encounter complex obfuscation techniques, including
chain-hopping, cross-chain swaps, and micro-structuring. Jurisdictions should
establish robust interagency mechanisms that facilitate joint operational
analysis and rapid response, and should use Public-Private Partnerships
(PPPs) to integrate real-time blockchain analytics and advanced tracing tools
6.1. Use oinf tbol LoEcAksc hopaeinra atinonasly. tics tools in DeFi-related investigations
64. LEAs should leverage blockchain analytics tools to support investigations
involving DeFi protocols. These tools enable the tracing of fund movements
across multiple blockchains and assets, including through mixers, bridges, and
complex smart contract interactions, allowing investigators to reconstruct
transaction flows. They also provide visualisation capabilities to map
relationships between wallets, entities, and protocols, alongside detailed
smart contract analysis to understand how funds move within DeFi
environments. In addition, automated detection of suspicious patterns, such
as layering or peeling, combined with advanced attribution techniques, can
support the identification of entities controlling wallets and their potential
links to illicit activity.
65. While blockchain analytics tools can support investigations into DeFi
arrangements, jurisdictions should be aware that their effectiveness may be
limited as DeFi platforms become more technically sophisticated. For example,
the migration of DeFi activity from public blockchains to specialised Layer 1
networks, many of which are not yet supported by mainstream analytics tools,
as well as the pooling of deposi ts from multiple users within a single smart
contract, can reduce transparency and make it more difficult to attribute
transactions to individual users.
56
Asset-Recovery-Guidance-Best-Practices.pdf.coredownload.pdf;
https://www.fatf-gafi.org/en/publications/Virtualassets/targeted-report-stablecoins-unhosted-wallets.html;
https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/dam/fatf-gafi/guidance/Updated-Guidance-VA-
V57ASP.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf
Please refer to the information included in section 2.1. of this report.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 37
Box 12. Hong Kong, China: Investigating DeFi arrangements
Within Hong Kong Police Forces (HKPF), a dedicated cryptocurrency
investigation team conducts investigations and regularly analyses the use of
DeFi protocols in criminal activities. Through these investigations, authorities
identify typologies involving decentralised exchanges, cross-chain swaps,
liquidity pools, and other DeFi mechanisms that may be used to facilitate fraud,
hacking, or the laundering of criminal proceeds. HKPF also operates a
cryptocurrency stop-payment co-ordination mechanism to facilitate the rapid
containment of illicit virtual assets. When crime proceeds are traced to DeFi-
related activities, HKPF may engage relevant platforms to obtain digital
footprint information and, where feasible, assist in preventing the dissipation
of assets associated with criminal activity.
In addition, HKPF have handled multiple incidents involving attacks on DeFi-
related platforms and Web3 infrastructure. These investigations involve
identifying the causes of security vulnerabilities, providing security advice to
affected entities, and co-ordinating rapid response actions to mitigate losses.
Such actions have, in some cases, enabled the containment of stolen virtual
assets shortly after the incidents occurred.
Source: Hong Kong, China
6.2. Co-ordination with other competent authorities
66. LEAs should closely collaborate with supervisory authorities, FIUs and other
relevant competent bodies. Rather than relying solely on traditional MoUs,
domestic co-operation should be operationalized through actionable
i. Establishing joint standard operating procedures (SOPs)
frameworks. This includes:
for emergency
asset freezing, providing cross-agency access to proprietary
blockchain analytics platforms, and facilitating temporary personnel
secondments between supervisory and LEAs to build lasting
ii. Specialised, multi-disciplinary joint task forces
institutional capacity and real-time operational synergy.
can support
investigations given the highly technical and borderless nature of DeFi
arrangements. These task forces should integrate the distinct
expertise of FIUs, cybercrime divisions of LEAs, and financial
supervisors. Pooling resources such as advanced blockchain analytics
tools, cyber-forensic capabilities, and traditional financial intelligence
allows authorities to conduct parallel investigations and prevents the
6.3. Freezing anlods sR oef cdoigvietarly e ovifd Ielnliccei.t Funds
67. Freezing and recovering funds linked to illicit activity in DeFi present both
operational and regulatory challenges. Criminals frequently exploit DeFi’s
composability and pseudonymity to layer transactions or route them through
mixers, cross-chain bridges, and DEXs before authorities can intervene. These
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

38 |
dynamics make traditional asset-seizure approaches harder to apply,
especially in the absence of centralized intermediaries.
68. An effective approach to mitigate these risks under the existing regulatory
framework is to focus efforts on adjacent components of the broader virtual
assets’ ecosystem that are capable of applying freezing or rejecting
mechanisms, as well as unique intermediaries within the DeFi ecosystem,
i. Fiat-backed stablecoin issuers
including:
that have the ability to freeze, block,
burn or reissue tokens associated with criminal activities play a
particularly relevant role, given that stablecoins represent 90% of VAs
58
in the DeFi ecosystem. To facilitate co-ordination, competent
authorities should actively leverage established global networks, such
as the INTERPOL I-24/7 secure communication channel which allows
LEAs to swiftly co-ordinate with stablecoin issuer’s home jurisdiction
and execute emergency asset freezing requests before illicit funds are
dissipated or off-ramped. Jurisdictions should also consider
integrating INTERPOL’s tailored Notices into their cross-border
ii. VASPs acting as custodial endpoints
investigative workflows.
can freeze illicit assets that have
been laundered through DeFi arrangements immediately upon
receiving a lawful order, such as a subpoena, seizure warrant or
freezing instruction. VASPs can be critical choke points for asset
recovery, as illicit actors abusing DeFi arrangements often will use a
iii. DeFi front-ends
fiat off-ramp.
that integrate certain compliance tools may be able to
automatically reject assets associated with illicit actors by leveraging
blockchain analytics, risk ratings, and other red flag indicators. These
rejections may prevent the illicit actors that may be using the front-
end from accessing a DEX, bridge, or other DeFi arrangement. The
front-end operator may then be able to contact the relevant authorities
to share information on the rejected transactions.
69. Criminal actors are increasingly targeting DeFi arrangements through
sophisticated hacks. In response, many protocols rely on individuals who hold
admin keys or participate in multisignature control structures who can take
emergency actions, such as disabling front-end interfaces, pausing contract
functionality, freezing specific vaults, pools or modules and adjusting system
parameters to prevent the attacker from completing the exploit. LEAs should
proactively identify and engage with these key individuals operating in their
jurisdiction, so that effective measures can be co-ordinated quickly to preserve
funds before they are moved out of the protocol.
58
For further information on how stablecoin issuers can freeze and burn stablecoins please see: targeted-report-on-
stablecoins-and-unhosted-wallets.pdf.coredownload.inline.pdf
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 39
7. International co-operation
7.1. Cross-border information sharing
70. Cross-border information sharing is fundamental to identify centralised DeFi
arrangements that may be operating without the appropriate registration or
licence. Effective cross-border co-operation also supports a deeper
understanding of the risks posed by truly decentralised DeFi arrangements
that may be abused by illicit actors, including the potential cascading effects
on regulated entities. Authorities should leverage to the largest extent possible
existing international co-operation mechanisms, like IOSCO’s Multilateral
Memorandum of Understanding (MMoU), to share data on emerging risks,
59
information sharing between FIUs
investigative findings and enforcement actions.
71. Effective also plays a key role in
identifying cross-border DeFi-related risks. Experiences from the FATF Global
Network indicate that exchanges of operational and strategic analysis can
support the detection of emerging misuse of DeFi arrangements and tracing
efforts. Jurisdictions have reported using the following channels to exchange
information:
60
i. Egmont Secure Web
61
Supervisory authorities
ii. “Next-Generation” FIU.net
72. should cooperate to the greatest extent possible to
exchange information on the persons who control or exercise sufficient
influence over DeFi arrangements, since these may be anywhere in the world,
and information on their identity may not be available in the jurisdiction
where the controller(s) of the DeFi arrangement operate. Supervisory
authorities should also share to the extent possible information about DeFi
arrangements, including technical, operational and governance structures, in
order to foster a consistent analysis of cross-border DeFi arrangements.
Supervisory authorities are encouraged to publish analysis of DeFi
arrangements and the broader DeFi ecosystem in line with the relevant
information sharing and privacy regulations.
73. Finally, private sector entities should share information among themselves
across borders, in accordance with applicable information-sharing
frameworks, to better identify and disrupt illicit flows within the DeFi
ecosystem. Certain financial institutions or VASPs may have access to unique
and valuable data, both on emerging patterns of misuse of DeFi arrangements
and on persons that control or exercise sufficient influence over DeFi
arrangements, that may not be available to regulated entities in other
jurisdictions. The timely cross-border sharing of such non-proprietary
information can enhance the ability of global compliance teams to detect risks
and strengthen their ML/TF mitigation measures.
59
60 FR14/23 Final Report with Policy Recommendations for Decentralized Finance (DeFi)
61 Organization and Structure - Egmont Group
‘Next-Generation’ FIU.net - European Commission
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

40 |
7.2. Cross-border investigations
Cross-border co-operation between LEAs
74. : Given the borderless nature of
DeFi and the lack of geographic restrictions, cross-border co-operation
between LEAs is essential. The use of traditional mechanisms such as Mutual
Legal Assistance (MLA) is essential for evidence gathering, but their standard
processing timelines may sometimes not fully align with the instantaneous
nature of decentralised value transfers. To complement these formal channels
and address the critical urgency of active investigations, jurisdictions are
encouraged to establish expedited, secure frameworks for the immediate
sharing of advanced blockchain analytics intelligence among FIUs and
cybercrime divisions. This rapid exchange is critical to successfully trace
multi-hop transactions before the investigation goes cold and traditional
mechanisms can complement the investigation with additional evidence.
Box 13. United States: The Samourai case
In November 2025, the U.S. Department of Justice sentenced Keonne
Rodriguez and William Lonergan Hill, the co-founders of Samourai Wallet, a
DeFi mixer that facilitated over USD 237 million in illegal transactions. The
criminal proceeds laundered through Samourai came from, among other
things, drug trafficking, darknet marketplaces, cyber-intrusions, frauds,
sanctioned jurisdictions, murder-for-hire schemes, and a child pornography
website. Rodriguez and Hill actively promoted Samourai to criminals,
including via claims that Samourai would make virtual assets “untraceable,
clean” on a darknet forum. Rodriguez and Hill were sentenced to five and four
years in prison, respectively, and have paid more than USD 6 million in
forfeited fees.
In this case, assistance was provided by Europol, the Portuguese Judicial Police
and the Icelandic Police, among others, during the investigation. Based on a
U.S. MLA request, the Icelandic authorities obtained information from the
server Samourai was using for its operations, which was located in Iceland,
providing transaction data to U.S. law enforcement counterparts that proved
critical to advancing the case. In addition, Hill was secured via a July 2024
extradition from Portugal, and the Portuguese authorities were instrumental
in obtaining additional useful evidence from Hill’s residence in Portugal.
French authorities also provided valuable assistance through MLA channels.
This case demonstrated the necessity of working with foreign partners early
in complex cases to identify relevant digitised data and suspects who may often
be operating across multiple jurisdictions.
Source: United States
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 41
7.3. Public-private co-operation
75. Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) play a pivotal role in addressing
ML/TF/PF risks arising from DeFi by enabling structured information sharing,
joint operational analysis and a shared understanding of emerging risks and
regulatory requirements between public authorities and private sector
participants. Jurisdictions should, in line with their risk and context, establish
appropriate communication channels to engage with DeFi arrangements,
when possible, as well as with VASPs, blockchain analytics firms, and financial
institutions to strengthen collaboration across the ecosystem.
76. PPPs are particularly valuable in helping authorities respond to regulatory,
supervisory and enforcement challenges. They can support authorities in
identifying the characteristics, governance features and control structures of
DeFi arrangements as well as in developing a deeper understanding of how
protocols and smart contracts are programmed and deployed. PPPs also play
a key role in promoting the development and adoption of AML/CFT measures
and decentralised identity solutions to strengthen user identification and
reduce anonymity-related risks. In addition, they facilitate tactical information
sharing, enable the development of typologies of illicit activity and emerging
trends, strengthen intelligence collection and enhance incident response to
hacks and exploits. Finally, PPPs can support industry standardisation
initiatives, including those led by international organisations (e.g. IEEE, ISO)
and industry consortia, contributing to improved security, interoperability,
and compliance in the DeFi ecosystem.
Box 14. United Kingdom: Regulatory thematic workshops with the
private sector to promote understanding of risks and compliance in DeFi
As part of its VA regulatory regulatory regime, the UK Financial Conduct
Authority (FCA) has increased engagement with private sector stakeholders to
discuss risks posed by DeFi and potential compliance tools for risk mitigation
through a series of thematic workshops, involving financial institutions, VASPs,
DeFi arrangements as well as compliance expertise on ML/TF/PF and
technological issues.
The workshops focused not only on the current and emerging ML/TF/PF risks
and relevant risk mitigation practices adopted by the industry, but also on the
technology risks posed by DeFi, including vulnerabilities in open codes
protocols and smart contracts that may be exploited by hackers. Through these
discussions, industry participants shared their experience of the limitations of
blockchain analytics and the potential for technical solutions like built-in
freeze functionality at the protocol level, and the use of zero-knowledge proof-
based ‘Know Your Customer’ checks. The workshops allowed the FCA to
refresh its assessment of illicit finance risks and mitigations and reflect
industry inputs into regulatory guidance.
Source: United Kingdom
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

42 |
Box 15. Singapore: Global Layer One (GL1)
Global Layer One (GL1) is a public-private initiative, supported by MAS, that
convenes global financial institutions, VASPs, entities involved in the DeFi
ecosystem and policymakers to advance asset tokenisation through open and
interoperable network standards. GL1 is developing reference architectures for
incorporating regulatory compliance controls directly into on-chain transaction
logic. These designs aim to support compliance with relevant regulatory
obligations, including AML/CFT/CPF requirements, through modular
compliance components that allow different actors to perform distinct roles
across the compliance value chain. The framework explores the use of verifiable
credentials and identity-linked attestations that may enable AML/CFT/CPF
checks to be embedded into programmable transaction conditions. This
approach seeks to allow regulated participants to demonstrate compliance with
applicable regulatory requirements while maintaining interoperability across
jurisdictions and tokenised asset networks.
While MAS contributes to GL1, participation in or use of the framework does
not in itself constitute supervisory endorsement. Regulated financial
institutions remain subject to MAS’ supervisory oversight, and compliance with
AML/CFT/CPF obligations is evaluated holistically, taking into account a range
of governance, operational, and risk management controls beyond on-chain
compliance mechanisms.
Source: Singapore
Conclusion
77. DeFi has continued to grow rapidly in the past few years, and it has the
potential to play an important role in the global financial system of the future.
Its technological features, such as automation, composability, 24/7
availability, and cross-border reach, create both opportunities for financial
innovation and substantial ML/TF/PF risks. These risks are amplified by
widespread misconceptions about “decentralisation”, persistent regulatory
gaps, and the increasing misuse of DeFi arrangements by cybercriminals,
fraudsters, professional money launderers and proliferation financing
networks, including through the abuse of advanced AI tools.
78. The FATF Standards already provide the framework to address these risks, but
implementation remains significantly insufficient. Most jurisdictions have not
yet identified DeFi arrangements operating in their territory, have not
assessed their risks, and have not applied R.15 to arrangements that qualify as
VASPs. A core challenge is determining who exercises control or sufficient
influence over DeFi arrangements. The report provides examples of criteria
that can be used by jurisdictions to conduct a holistic determination and
presents examples and case studies of control and ‘sufficient influence’ in
practice.
79. Jurisdictions should adopt a functional, risk-based approach to identifying
controllers, applying licensing/registration requirements, and supervising
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 43
DeFi arrangements. Authorities should strengthen investigative and
enforcement capabilities, including blockchain analytics, operational co-
operation, and public-private partnerships, to respond effectively to
increasingly sophisticated DeFi-enabled illicit finance. For arrangements that
are truly decentralised and fall outside the scope of the Standards,
jurisdictions should leverage alternative risk-mitigation measures targeting
adjacent regulatory access points such as stablecoin issuers, VASPs, and
application-layer interfaces. These alternative risk-mitigation measures may
be calibrated where truly decentralised arrangements implement adequate
risk-mitigation measures.
80. Jurisdictions within the FATF Global Network should proactively monitor the
potential growth of truly decentralised DeFi arrangements. At the same time,
they should apply appropriate risk-mitigating measures to regulated entities
that interact with such arrangements, as outlined in section 5.5 of this report.
81. The FATF should continue to monitor market developments and risks
associated with the DeFi ecosystem, especially truly decentralised DeFi
arrangements, to ensure that the FATF standards remain relevant.
82. Ultimately, effective mitigation of DeFi-related risks will require co-ordinated
global action, transparent governance practices, innovative compliance
solutions, and sustained engagement between regulators, law-enforcement
agencies, and the private sector. Without such measures, the rapid evolution
of DeFi, which has potential benefits for payments modernisation, can risk
creating growing regulatory asymmetries, enabling jurisdictional arbitrage,
Recommendaantdio fnacsi ltiota tminigt iigllaictiet ftihnaen rcies akt sstcealme. ming from DeFi arrangements
1.1. For jurisdictions
1) Proportionate to the risk and context, conduct a risk assessment of the risks
linked to the DeFi ecosystem , which may be incorporated into the national,
sectoral, or industry-specific risk assessments, or into the jurisdiction’s VAs
and VASPs risk assessment. This assessment should identify the materiality
and nature of DeFi-related ML/TF/PF risks, including the extent of domestic
exposure, cross-border dimensions, and potential vulnerabilities arising from
the operation, governance, and usage of DeFi arrangements.
2) Based on the risk assessment, implement proportionate mitigating measures.
These may include requiring centralised DeFi arrangements and encouraging
Decentralised DeFi arrangements to embed AML/CFT controls at the smart
contract and/or user interface levels; requiring other entities interacting with
the DeFi ecosystem, such as financial institutions and VASPs, to apply
additional AML/CFT controls to mitigate risks arising from the DeFi
arrangement’s underlying users; and, in higher risk scenarios, where DeFi
arrangements refuse to cooperate with public authorities, as a last resort,
prohibiting them from operating in the territory (blacklisting).
3) Engage with industry participants, including DeFi arrangements, VASPs,
blockchain-analytics companies and other service providers interacting with
DeFi arrangements to identify innovative solutions and tools to enhance the
implementation of effective AML/CFT controls within the DeFi ecosystem
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

44 |
without disproportionally hindering innovation (e.g., digital identity,
embedded KYC/CDD programs).
4) Establish appropriate criteria for determining control or sufficient influence
in the context of DeFi and, where such control is identified, apply AML/CFT
measures to these arrangements. Conduct targeted industry outreach
(including participation in relevant industry events) to ensure that centralised
DeFi arranogements are aware of applicable requirements.
Where controllers exist but cannot be identified, and the DeFi
arrangement cannot ensure that its operations comply with
AML/CFT requirements, supervisors should treat it as
unregulated and apply the same mitigating measures used for
truly decentralised arrangements, while continuing to make
enquiries and, where appropriate and possible, applying
proportionate sanctions.
5) Establish clear regulatory pathways that enable regulated institutions to
interact with DeFi arrangements while preserving the integrity of their
AML/CFT compliance frameworks and that of the broader financial system.
Regulated institutions should implement appropriate AML/CFT measures to
mitigate the risks posed by DeFi arrangements and effectively apply controls
to the underlying customers of such arrangements in line with
Recommendations 10. These measures should be proportionate to the risks
identified and take into account any mitigating measures implemented by the
DeFi arrangement, such as embedded AML/CFT controls at the smart contract
level or reliance on third-party AML/CFT service providers.
6) When appropriate based on risk and context, develop structured and
accessible regulatory engagement mechanisms, such as pre-application
meetings, innovation hubs, regulatory sandboxes, and technical workshops, to
provide DeFi arrangements with clarity on compliance expectations before
they enter the market.
7) Establish mechanisms to identify high-risk or non-compliant DeFi
arrangements. These mechanisms may include public registries, supervisory
notices, or risk-rating disclosures, which can help guide market participants,
incentivise responsible behaviour, and enhance overall market integrity.
8) Enhance oversight of key off-chain infrastructure providers that serve as
regulatory access points within the DeFi ecosystem, such as front-end
operators, and encourage them to adopt tailored measures to hinder illicit
activity.
9) Consider requiring or encouraging all types of DeFi arrangements operating
within the jurisdiction to designate a responsible person for timely
engagement with competent authorities, particularly in the context of
law-enforcement investigations, to address the current lack of efficient co-
operation mechanisms.
10)Strengthen interagency co-ordination and operational capacity for
DeFi-related investigations by establishing robust mechanisms for joint
analysis and rapid response, and by leveraging Public-Private Partnerships to
integrate real-time blockchain analytics and advanced tracing tools.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

| 45
1.2. For the private sector
For DeFi arrangements
11)Centralised DeFi arrangements and those that are centralised in practice, but
where controllers cannot be readily identified, should fully comply with the
requirements of Recommendation 15.
12)Centralised DeFi arrangements should prioritise investment in the
development of innovative tools that enable the effective implementation of
AML/CFT measures and strengthen technological capacities to support the
prompt identification, seizing, and freezing of illicit assets.
13)DeFi arrangements that are truly decentralised and fall outside the scope of
the FATF Standards are encouraged to understand their ML/TF risks and to
integrate proportionate AML/CFT controls into their operational frameworks,
as appropriate, in order to support the overall integrity of the financial system.
14)All DeFi arrangements should:
i. Collaborate to the greatest extent possible with competent
authorities in the context of AML/CFT investigations and designate a
dedicated point of contact (PoC) to maintain formal communication
channels with law enforcement authorities and FIUs. The PoC may be
the controller of the DeFi arrangement in centralised DeFi
arrangements, or the persons responsible for the creation of the
arrangement in truly decentralised DeFi arrangements (e.g.,
developers).
ii. Draft and make readily available to competent authorities
documentation that clearly sets out the control and decision-making
structures within the DeFi arrangement. Such documentation should
identify the persons exercising operational influence, governance
authority, or protocol-level controls. It should also include contact
pooints for competent authorities.
For DeFi arrangements that are truly decentralised, the persons
responsible for the creation of the arrangement should also be
responsible for explaining the governance and operational
model, including the features that substantiate claims of
decentralisation.
iii. Conduct regular audits related to protocol cybersecurity and ensure
ongoing monitoring of suspicious trends and potential exploits to
better prevent theft and abuse by illicit actors.
For Financial Institutions and VASPs
15)Implement Recommendation 13 when establishing business relationships
with centralised DeFi arrangements and those that are centralised in practice,
but where controllers cannot be readily identified. Where controllers cannot
ultimately be identified, after all reasonable avenues have been explored,
apply the same risk mitigating measures as those applicable to truly
decentralised DeFi arrangements.
16)Interact with DeFi arrangements that are not subject to regulation in line with
appropriate AML/CFT measures to mitigate risks arising from their
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

46 |
customers, including customer due diligence (e.g. verification of the identity of
underlying customers) and ongoing monitoring of the integrity and security of
the protocol.
17)Share information with other private sector entities, including across
jurisdictions, to improve the identification and disruption of illicit flows within
the DeFi ecosystem, in compliance with applicable legal and regulatory
frameworks.
Annex A: Overview of FATF work on VAs and VASPs
2018 •
Recommendation 15 amended including addition of new definitions “virtual
2019 •
asset” and “virtual asset service provider”.
•
• Adoption of Interpretive Note to R.15
Creation of the FATF Virtual Assets Contact Group (VACG)
Initial guidance for regulators: A risk-based approach to VAs and VASPs
2020 •
(updated in 2021)
• st
• 12 month review of the new FATF Standards: 1 12-month review
Report to the G20: FATF Report to the G20 on So-called Stablecoins
2021 •
Risk indicators: List of Red Flag Indicators of ML/TF through VAs
62
• Updated guidance : Updated Guidance for a Risk-Based Approach to VA and
VASPs
2022 • nd
24 month review of the FATF Standards: 2 12-month review
Report on R.15 compliance, with a particular focus on the Travel Rule, and
emerging VA risks: Targeted Update on Implementation of the FATF Standards
2023 •
on VA and VASPs
• Report on ransomware, with focus on VA risks and trends: Countering
Ransomware Financing
Report on R.15 compliance, with a particular focus on the Travel Rule, and
emerging VA risks: Targeted Update on Implementation of the FATF Standards
2024 •
on VA and VASPs
Status of implementation of Recommendation 15 by FATF Members and
2025 •
Jurisdictions with Materially Important VASP Activity
• Status of implementation of Recommendation 15 by FATF Members and
• Jurisdictions with Materially Important VASP Activity
Best Practices in Travel Rule Supervision
Quick guide on assessing the Money Laundering risks of virtual assets (VA) and
2026 •
virtual asset service providers (VASP)
• Targeted report on Stablecoins and Unhosted Wallets - Peer-to-Peer
Transactions
• Understanding and Mitigating the Risks of Off-shore Virtual Asset Service
Providers
7th Targeted Update on the Implementation of FATF Standards on Virtual
Assets and Virtual Asset Service Providers
62
The 2021 updated Guidance included updates focusing on the following six key areas: clarification of the definitions of VAs
and VASPs; guidance on how the FATF Standards apply to stablecoins; additional guidance on the risks and the tools available
to jurisdictions to address the ML/TF risks for peer-to-peer transactions; updated guidance on the licensing and registration of
VASPs; additional guidance for the public and private sectors on the implementation of the Travel Rule; and principles of
information-sharing and co-operation amongst VASP supervisors.
TARGETED REPORT ON REGULATORY CHALLENGES FROM DECENTRALISED FINANCE
© FATF-OECD 2026

July 2026
www.fatf-gafi.org
